
  







    
        













    



  








  
  
    






























    
        
    
    










    Skip to Content



    Stanford Medicine
    
        
            Stanford Medicine 25
            
                –
                Promoting the Culture of Bedside Medicine
            
        
    
    
    
        Site Nav
        
            
            Menu
        

    














    An Initiative of the Program for Bedside Medicine

    
        	
                    
                        See us on youtube
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on facebook
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on twitter
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on linkedin
                        
                    
                


    

























    

        
            













        



    Stanford Medicine

        Explore Stanford Medicine


        	
                Health Care 
                
                
                    
                        	
                            Find a doctor

	Adult-care doctor
	Pediatrician or pediatric specialist
	Obstetrician
	Clinics & Services

	Adult care
	Pediatric care
	Obstetrics
	Clinical trials



                        
                            	Locations

	Stanford Health Care
	Stanford Children's Health
	Emergency Department
	Dial 911 in the event of a medical emergency


                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Health Care

                                Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Research 
                
                    
                        	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Institutes
	Research centers
	See full directory
	Research Resources

	Research administration
	Academic profiles
	Clinical trials
	Funding opportunities
	See all
	Professional Training

	Postdoctoral scholars
	Clinical research fellows



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Research News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant' 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Research

                                Learn how we are fueling innovation 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Education 
                
                    
                        	MD program
	PA Programs
	PhD programs
	Masters programs
	Continuing Medical Education
	Postdoctoral scholars
	Residencies & fellowships
	High School & Undergraduate Programs
	See all
	Education Resources

	Academic profiles
	School Administration
	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Alumni services
	Faculty resources
	Diversity programs
	Lane Library
	Student resources



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Education News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Alice L. Walton School of Medicine and Stanford Medicine host AI conference on community health 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Education 

                                Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Give 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Support Stanford Medicine

                            
                        

                        	Support teaching, research, and patient care.  

	Ways to give
	Why giving matters
	Make a gift online



                        
                            
                                Support Children's Health

                            
                        

                        
                            	Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health 

	Ways to give
	How your gift helps
	Make an online gift


                        
                        
                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                About 
                
                    
                        	About us
	News
	Contacts
	Maps & directions
	Leadership
	Vision
	Diversity
	Global health
	Community engagement
	Events
	How you can help



                        
                            Stanford School of Medicine

                            Stanford Health Care

                            Stanford Children's Health

                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                
                
                Site Search
                
                    


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

                

            


    
    
        


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

    












    
    
        	
        The 25
        
        The 25
	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma


            









  
    
  





  
    More

    










    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Aortic Regurgitation Exam


	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam


	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Carpal Tunnel Exam


	Cardiac Second Sounds  
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology: Learning the Language
	Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam


	Gait Abnormalities  


	Hand Exam 


	Hip Region Exam


	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements
	Knee Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Liver Exam


	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Veins & Wave Forms


	Newborn Jaundice












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Parkinson's Exam

 
	Pelvic Exam


	Precordial Movements
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure


	Rectal Exam
	Shoulder Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam


	Tongue Exam

 
	Thyroid Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    








  


            
          

          
        
	
        Blog
        
        Blog
	ArchiveArchive
	20232023
	Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside 
	Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA
	The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside
	Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care 
	How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese  
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Resources to Help Physicians Promote Skin Health
	Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge



	20222022
	Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness
	Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health
	Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine
	Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health
	How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing 
	How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations
	The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine
	How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer
	7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations
	Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside 



	20212021
	Registration is Now Open for the 2021 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 
	Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment
	The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic
	Teaching Empathy in Medical Education
	The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions
	Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam
	Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era



	20202020
	Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship
	Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care 
	 
	 



	20192019
	How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine
	Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU
	Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care
	Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside
	Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine 
	Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time
	Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes
	The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians
	The Art and Science of Patient Care
	Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine
	A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore
	Humanizing the EHR



	20182018
	What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?
	An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout
	The Spine Sign
	Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care
	Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo
	Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians
	Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside
	UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam
	Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine
	Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine
	The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins
	Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience
	The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery
	Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction
	Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity
	AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills
	The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care
	How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside
	Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills
	As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam
	Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine
	Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine
	AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside
	Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools
	Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner



	20172017
	Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia
	Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms 
	Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book
	Signs of Scleroderma
	can-improv-help-doctors
	conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum



	20162016
	What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?
	What is this Kussmaul’s sign?
	Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?
	Referred Pain Physical Exam
	Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?
	Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity 
	What is a roth spot?
	Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!
	Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing
	What is the Howell-Jolly body?
	What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?
	What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?
	What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?
	What is rhinophyma?
	What is the ugly duckling sign?
	Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.
	What is the exam of calciphylaxis?
	Stanford Medicine 25 Launches New Website
	Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam
	What is skin coining (Gua sha)?



	20152015
	Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957
	Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview
	Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam
	What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?
	Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |
	The Saddle Nose - Overview
	 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 2015
	COMING OUT OF THE COLD
	Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes



	20132013
	Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?
	Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor
	Congratulations to our ACP Winners!
	Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?
	An interesting illustration of the physical exam
	If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?
	A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?
	Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd
	Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?
	This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?
	Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!
	A patient asks you… what is this?
	Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?
	Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?
	The History of Pulsus Paradoxus
	Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus
	Remember this finding???
	Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!
	Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese
	Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!
	Teaching the teachers… Our methods.
	What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?
	Abdominal Wall Pain
	Do you know what this is???
	This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session
	Examination of the Trachea
	Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2
	The History of the Reflex Hammer
	Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford
	Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!
	Stanford Medicine 25 Clinical Pearl Award
	11 Facts About Sir William Osler
	Know your tremor?
	Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm



	20242024
	Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination
	Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why 
	Books On Bedside Medicine: Stanford Medicine 25’s Summer Reading List 
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD
	Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside
	9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Top Podcast Picks
	Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort
	Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch
	Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease






	CategoriesCategories
	Cardiology
	Dermatology
	Endocrinology
	Extremities
	Gastroenterology/Hepatology
	Gynecology/Women's Health
	Hematology/oncology
	History
	Neurology
	News
	Ophthalmology
	Perspective
	Pulmonary
	Rheumatology
	Technology





            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        Video Gallery
        
        
        
	
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
        
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Newborn Cardiac Examination 


            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        About
        
        About
	Symposium
	Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams
	TedMed
	Blog Overview
	Body as Text: Teaching Physical Examination Skills | Stanford Medicine 25
	Contact


            









  






            
          

          
        


    
    





  






  
    










    
    
        
    
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Approach to the Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 


	    
    

  
  
    When done properly the physical exam can not only allow us to make a diagnosis of aortic regurgitation, but also help determine its specific causes and the presence of complications like systolic and diastolic heart failure.

  
  
 





                    
                
            

        

    

    

  













share

    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    













    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        










    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Introduction
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 

  
  
 














    Aortic regurgitation is one of the most commonly encountered heart valve diseases both in the inpatient and outpatient settings. The physical exam is crucial for the diagnosis of aortic regurgitation and also for the identification of its causes and possible complications like heart failure. However, it is very important to learn the proper technique for the different sections of the exam to be 100% confident about the presence or absence of any findings. On this page we will describe the correct technique and evidence-based medicine for the different parts of the exam for aortic regurgitation, followed by the most common differential diagnoses.
















 








    
    
        

            

            

            

            

            

             

             

             

            

            
                
             

            
                
             

            

            

              

            

                       

            
            
                
                
            

        
    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Inspection and Palpation
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 

  
  
 














    In evaluating a patient with suspected aortic regurgitation, it is important to either inspect or palpate the precordium to check the location of the Point of Maximal Impulse (PMI). Normally the PMI is at the 5th intercostal space on the left midclavicular line. However, in a patient with chronic aortic regurgitation the heart may be enlarged, and in that case the PMI will be displaced inferiorly and laterally.The physical exam of the shoulder starts by observing the patient removing his or her shirt. This is our first opportunity to notice any functional impairments of the shoulder joint.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    









                
            

            
                
                    The PMI is normally at the 5th intercostal space on the left midclavicular line.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Patient positioning & palpation technique

To make it easier to appreciate the PMI it is important to have the patient assume the correct position. Ask your patient to sit upright and lean forward. Alternatively, you can ask the patient to lie down and move into the left lateral decubitus position. In both cases the heart will be closer to the chest making it easier to locate the PMI. Once the patient is in the correct position, palpate just below the nipple to appreciate the PMI. You can use either your fingertips or your full palm.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Correct patient positioning and palpation technique.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Ascending aortic aneurysm

It is also important to palpate the suprasternal notch and the 1st and 2nd right intercostal spaces. A significant pulsation here can indicate an ascending aortic aneurysm as the cause for the aortic regurgitation.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    
























                
            

            
                
                    Ascending aortic aneurysm: pulsations in the right upper ICS and sternal notch.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Auscultation
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 

  
  
 














    Auscultation is the most important part of the physical exam for aortic regurgitation. In a patient with aortic regurgitation the typical murmur is a decrescendo early-diastolic blowing murmur, best heard on the left lower sternal border, around the 3rd and 4th intercostal spaces. If this murmur is heard louder on the right sternal border, it may suggest that aortic root dilation is the cause for the aortic regurgitation. This typically occurs in the case of an ascending aortic aneurysm or aortic dissection.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    





















                
            

            
                
                    Aortic regurgitation: decrescendo early-diastolic blowing murmur.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Correct technique

As a general rule, it is useful to palpate an artery during auscultation for heart murmurs. This makes much easier to determine if a murmur is diastolic or systolic. Any artery in the upper extremity can be used for this purpose.

It's also very important to position the patient in the right way. The murmur of aortic regurgitation is indeed best heard when the patient is sitting upright, leaning forward and in full expiration. In this way the heart will be closer to chest wall and the murmur easier to appreciate. However, it is important to make sure that the patient does not exhale too forcefully, since that would cause a Valsalva maneuver that can reduce the venous return to the heart and thus the intensity of the murmur of aortic regurgitation. Also, make sure to auscultate on the right sternal border as well for the presence of aortic root dilation.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Auscultation on the left lower sternal border.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  

















    


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Associated murmurs: systolic flow murmur

In a patient with aortic regurgitation there is an increase in the blood flow across the aortic valve. This may generate a systolic outflow tract murmur that is best heard on the aortic area at the right upper sternal border, intercostal spaces 1st and 2nd.

This systolic murmur is usually less loud than the murmur of aortic regurgitation. For this reason, and due to the contemporary presence of the diastolic murmur, it is not always easy to appreciate. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Systolic flow murmur: right upper sternal border.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Associated murmurs: Austin-Flint murmur

The regurgitant blood flow across the aortic valve can cause a functional mitral stenosis by impacting on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve and preventing it to fully open during diastole. This functional mitral stenosis presents as a low-pitched, mid to late diastolic murmur that is commonly referred to as Austin-Flint murmur.

Similar to the murmur of mitral stenosis, the Austin-Flint murmur can be best heard with the bell of the stethoscope at the 5th intercostal space on the left midclavicular line and with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    
























                
            

            
                
                    Austin-Flint murmur: pathophysiology.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Cardiac maneuvers: isometric handgrip

There are several cardiac maneuvers that can be used to better characterize heart murmurs by changing their intensity. The most useful maneuver for the exam of aortic regurgitation is the isometric handgrip.

To perform this maneuver, ask the patient to squeeze with both hands an object such as a rolled-up piece of paper. This will cause an increase in the afterload and as a consequence in the regurgitant blood flow across the aortic valve, making the aortic regurgitation murmur louder and easier to hear.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Isometric handgrip maneuver.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Other Clinical Exam Findings
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation

  
  
 














    In a patient with aortic regurgitation the heart has to increase the stroke volume in order to keep the cardiac output constant. This causes an increase in the systolic blood pressure. At the same time there is a decrease in the diastolic blood pressure directly caused by the retrograde diastolic blood flow. This determines an increase in the pulse pressure (systolic BP – diastolic BP) which manifests with several clinical signs throughout the body that are here briefly described. It is important to note, however, that these findings are not always present since they are typical of chronic severe aortic insufficiency.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Corrigan’s pulse or sign

The Corrigan’s pulse is a bounding carotid pulse, characterized by a rapid systolic rise and a rapid diastolic collapse. To detect the Corrigan’s sign, inspect the base of the patient’s neck, right where the carotids are.

Click here to see an example of the Corrigan’s sign.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Corrigan’s sign: observe the carotids at the base of the neck.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Watson’s water hammer pulse

The water hammer pulse is a bounding pulse with rapid systolic rising and diastolic collapse that can be appreciated at either the radial, ulnar or brachial artery.

It is accentuated by slightly lifting up the patient’s arm.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Watson’s water hammer pulse: inspection.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















    Click here to see an example of the Watson’s water hammer pulse (ulnar artery).

The water hammer pulse can also be palpated by placing the palm of your hand on the patient’s wrist so that you can feel both the radial and the ulnar arteries. Again, it is important to lift up the patient’s arm to make it easier to detect the pulsation. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Watson’s water hammer pulse: palpation.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Quincke’s capillary pulse

Repeated flushing and blanching of the capillaries in the nail beds and lips.

 

De Musset’s sign

Anterior-posterior bobbing movement of the head synchronous with the arterial pulse.

 

Müller's sign

Back and forth pulsation of the uvula.

 

Becker Sign

Visible pulsations of the retinal arteries on the ophthalmoscopic exam.

 

Lighthouse sign

Alternate blanching and flushing of the forehead and face.

 

Rosenbach Sign

This sign consists in systolic pulsations of the liver that can be appreciated by palpation of the RUQ.

 

Gerhard Sign

This sign is described as systolic pulsations of the spleen felt on palpation of the LUQ.

 

Landolfi's sign

Alternating systolic miosis and diastolic mydriasis in both pupils.

 

Lincoln Sign

Tremor of the foot when one leg is crossed above the other, caused by excessive pulsation of the popliteal artery.

 

Traube’s sign (pistol-shot sound)

While auscultating over the femoral arteries it is possible to hear a pistol shot sound both during systole and during diastole. The sound can be accentuated by compressing the femoral artery with the stethoscope. The quality of this sound is very similar to the Korotkoff ones used for measurement of the blood pressure.

 

Duroziez sign (murmur)

This is a diastolic-systolic murmur heard when applying firm pressure with the stethoscope on the femoral arteries. The sign is positive only if both the systolic and diastolic murmurs are heard. The diastolic murmur becomes louder when more pressure is applied on the distal rim of the stethoscope.

 

Hill’s sign

This sign is considered positive when the difference between the systolic blood pressure measured at the foot and at the arm is greater than 20 mmHg.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Signs of Heart Failure
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 

  
  
 














    A patient with aortic regurgitation can develop both systolic and diastolic heart failure. Once the diagnosis of aortic regurgitation is made, it is important to perform a thorough exam to identify any signs of heart failure that may be present. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Signs of systolic heart failure

Look for an S3 gallop, which develops as a consequence of heart enlargement in chronic aortic regurgitation. Other signs of systolic heart failure are peripheral cyanosis and cold and clammy extremities, both the result of poor peripheral blood flow secondary to the reduced cardiac output. 

 Lastly, in a patient with aortic regurgitation it is very important to calculate the pulse pressure (systolic BP – diastolic BP). Usually in presence of aortic regurgitation the pulse pressure is very high. A normal or decreased pulse pressure may indicate a reduced cardiac output and incipient systolic heart failure.

Signs of diastolic heart failure

These are signs of volume overload, both in the systemic and pulmonary circulation. In the systemic circulation the typical manifestation is peripheral edema. This usually happens in the dependent areas, that are the lower extremities in a sitting patient, and the sacrum in a bedridden patient. Another sign of systemic volume overload is jugular venous distension. Instead, volume overload in the pulmonary circulation manifests as rales on chest auscultation, which indicate pulmonary edema. 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Specific Causes of Aortic Regurgitation
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 

  
  
 














    There are many different causes of aortic regurgitation. For a complete list, look at the end of the page. Some of these conditions give specific clinical manifestations that when identified can help pinpoint the exact etiology of aortic regurgitation in your patient.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Endocarditis

Typical clinical findings include:

-       Osler nodes: painful red/violaceous nodules usually found on the pads of fingers and toes;

-       Janeway lesions: non painful red macules found on the palms and soles;

-       Roth spots: a red hemorrhagic lesion of the retina with a characteristic white center representing fibrin-platelet plugs;

-       Splinter hemorrhages: subungual hemorrhages appearing as linear non blanching brown-red lesions on the nail beds.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    





















                
            

            
                
                    Osler nodes.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Janeway lesions.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    















                
            

            
                
                    Roth spots.





                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    












                
            

            
                
                    Splinter hemorrhages.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Genetic Diseases: Marfan’s syndrome

Genetic diseases affecting the connective tissue, like Marfan’s syndrome can cause dilation of the aortic root and, as a consequence, aortic regurgitation.

Typical clinical findings in patients with Marfan’s syndrome include:

-       Characteristic body habitus with very long limbs and fingers. These patients are usually very tall with an arm span that exceeds their height;

-       Positive thumb sign: to elicit this sign ask the patient to close the fist or just to cross the thumb on the palm. If the thumb extends beyond the palm, then the sign is positive;

-       Positive wrist sign: ask the patient to grip his or her hand with the other one. The sign is positive if the thumb overlaps with the fifth finger.

NB: both the thumb and wrist sign are due to the long fingers and joint hyperlaxity typical of a patient with Marfan’s syndrome.

 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    















                
            

            
                
                    Positive thumb sign.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    





















                
            

            
                
                    Positive wrist sign.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Aortic Dissection

Patients present with severe tearing chest pain radiating to the back. Clinical signs useful to make a diagnosis include:

-       Asymmetric pulses in the extremities. Look for a delayed or absent pulse on one side only;

-       Difference in blood pressure between the two arms.

Infective Aortitis

Rarely seen today, infective aortitis was a common etiology of aortic regurgitation in the pre-antibiotic era. In particular, Syphilis was the most common cause.

The mechanism for aortic regurgitation in infective aortitis is the dilation of the aortic root secondary to aortic wall inflammation and damage. This results in an ascending aortic aneurysm.

Whenever an aortic aneurysm is causing aortic regurgitation there will be two characteristic signs on exam:

-       Palpable pulsations on the suprasternal notch and the 1st and 2nd intercostal spaces;

-       Early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation louder at the right sternal border rather than at the left lower sternal border.

Rheumatic Heart Disease

This is much more commonly seen as a cause of aortic regurgitation in developing countries.

Together with aortic regurgitation, such patients will almost always have rheumatic mitral valve disease presenting as mitral regurgitation or stenosis.

Chronic/Severe Hypertension

Patients with long standing severe hypertension may develop aortic valve disease usually manifesting as aortic regurgitation (secondary to dilation of the aortic root).

Since chronic severe hypertension damages blood vessels all over the body, in these patients it is possible to observe characteristic vascular lesions and ischemic changes on the retinal exam, like flame hemorrhages and cotton wool spots. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    















                
            

            
                
                    Fundoscopy: Cotton Wool Spots.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    












                
            

            
                
                    Fundoscopy: Flame hemorrhage.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















    




















Check out our Stanford 25 page on the Fundoscopic exam
by clicking this link!





















                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Evidenced-Based Medicine*
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation 

  
  
 














     

*Credit goes to “Evidenced-based physical diagnosis - 4th ed”, Steven McGee, MD.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Here we describe the most significant evidence supporting the clinical utility of different signs and techniques in the exam for aortic regurgitation.

Inspection & palpation

 The absence of an enlarged or sustained PMI reduces the chances that aortic regurgitation is present by almost 45% (negative Likelihood Ratio of 0.1).

Auscultation

The characteristic murmur of aortic regurgitation, early diastolic louder at the left lower sternal border, has a positive Likelihood Ratio of 9.9 for the diagnosis of mild or more severe aortic regurgitation. This means that hearing this murmur on physical exam increases the probability that aortic regurgitation is present by roughly 45%. 



On the other hand, this finding has a negative Likelihood Ratio of 0.1 for moderate to severe aortic regurgitation. The clinical implication is that not detecting the characteristic early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation will decrease the probability that an aortic leak is actually present by almost 45%.



When the early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation is heard louder on the right sternal border there is a 30-45% increase in the probability that a dilated aortic root is the cause for the aortic regurgitation (positive Likelihood Ratio of 8.2).


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    





















                
            

            
                
                    Auscultation for aortic regurgitation: evidence-based medicine.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















    Blood pressure 

 In a patient presenting with the characteristic murmur of aortic regurgitation, the following blood pressure changes have a high diagnostic utility:

-       Diastolic blood pressure < 50 mmHg (positive Likelihood Ratio 19.3 à more than 50 % increase in the chances that aortic regurgitation is present)

-       Pulse pressure > 80 mmHg (positive Likelihood Ratio 10.9 à more than 50 % increase in the probability that the patient has aortic regurgitation).

Hill sign

 The Hill sign is positive if there is more than 20 mmHg difference in the systolic blood pressure between the arm and the foot. If the cutoff for positivity is moved up to more than 60 mmHg difference, the sign has a positive Likelihood Ratio of 17.3 for the presence of aortic regurgitation (increase in the probability that aortic regurgitation is present by more than 50%).











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Differential Diagnoses
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Aortic Regurgitation

  
  
 














    Aortic regurgitation can be caused either by primary damage to the valve leaflets, or by dilation of the aortic root that prevents the valve from closing completely during diastole. In some cases, both mechanisms are present at the same time.

Accordingly, one way to classify the etiologies of aortic regurgitation is the following:

-       Primary valve damage

o   Infectious endocarditis

o   Rheumatic valve disease

o   Calcific aortic valve disease (even though most commonly manifests as aortic stenosis)

o   Myxomatous degeneration

-       Primary aortic root dilation

o   Chronic severe hypertension

o   Marfan’s syndrome

o   Ehlers-Danlos syndrome

o   Giant cell arteritis

o   Takayasu arteritis

o   Infectious aortitis

-       Contemporary valve damage and aortic root dilation

o   Aortic dissection

o   Ankylosing spondylitis

o   Bicuspid aortic valve

 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















    
    
        
    


    




    








    
        
    
    





    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    







    
    
    
    
        
            
            
                

            
        
    
    
    
        
            
                
            

        

    

    
        








	



	
		
	
	
	



	Key Learning Points


    

    
        Learn the shoulder exam aspects that include: 

	inspection
	palpation
	provocative tests
	neuro exam
	awareness of more concerning causes


 



        
    

    














    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Related to Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam


	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Management


	Cardiac Second Sounds












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  





















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    The Stanford Medicine 25
	    
    

  
  
  
 


	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam
	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Cardiac Second Sounds
	Carpal Tunnel Exam
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam (Ophthalmoscopy)
	Gait Abnormalities
	Hand Exam
	Hip Region Exam
	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples
	Knee Exam
	Liver Exam
	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Vein Exam
	Newborn Jaundice Assessment 
	Pelvic Exam
	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Measurement Techniques
	Rectal Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam
	Thyroid Exam
	Tongue Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Visit the 25
	Shoulder Exam Tutorial
	Parkinson's Disease Exam
	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Modified Sarnat Exam for Neonatal Encephalopathy
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	Rapid Assessment of a Newborn
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma








                    
                
            

        

    

    








  









  











    
    
        
















    
    Stanford Medicine 25

        
            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Learn more about Stanford 25.

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    The 25

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Video Gallery

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Annual Symposium

                
            

            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Blog

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Recent Posts

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Archive

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Categories

                
            

        

        
            Stanford School of Medicine

            
            
            
                About

                Contact

                Maps & Directions

                Careers

            

            
                Basic Science Departments

                Clinical Science Departments

                Academic Programs

                Vision

            

        

    





            
        


        
             Find People
        

        
             Visit Stanford
        

        
             Search Clinical Trials
        

        
             Give a Gift
        


    

















    
        
            ©2025 Stanford University

            
            
                	
                        Privacy Policy
                    
	
                        Terms of Use
                    
	
                        Accessibility
                    
	
                        Non-Discrimination
                    
	
                        
                            See us on Facebook
                        
                    
	
                        
                            See us on X (Twitter)
                        
                    


            


        

    




    
    



  





  
    Non-Discrimination

    
      Stanford complies with all applicable civil rights laws and does not engage in illegal preferences or discrimination.
      

      Stanford's Non-Discrimination Policy
    

  



  	
      Stanford University
    
	
      Stanford School of Medicine
    
	
      Stanford Health Care
    
	
      Stanford Children's Health
    
	
      Stanford Health Care Tri-Valley
    
	
      Stanford Medicine Partners
    





  

  









  


