
  







    
        













    



  








  
  
    






























    
        
    
    










    Skip to Content



    Stanford Medicine
    
        
            Stanford Medicine 25
            
                –
                Promoting the Culture of Bedside Medicine
            
        
    
    
    
        Site Nav
        
            
            Menu
        

    














    An Initiative of the Program for Bedside Medicine

    
        	
                    
                        See us on youtube
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on facebook
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on twitter
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on linkedin
                        
                    
                


    

























    

        
            













        



    Stanford Medicine

        Explore Stanford Medicine


        	
                Health Care 
                
                
                    
                        	
                            Find a doctor

	Adult-care doctor
	Pediatrician or pediatric specialist
	Obstetrician
	Clinics & Services

	Adult care
	Pediatric care
	Obstetrics
	Clinical trials



                        
                            	Locations

	Stanford Health Care
	Stanford Children's Health
	Emergency Department
	Dial 911 in the event of a medical emergency


                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Health Care

                                Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Research 
                
                    
                        	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Institutes
	Research centers
	See full directory
	Research Resources

	Research administration
	Academic profiles
	Clinical trials
	Funding opportunities
	See all
	Professional Training

	Postdoctoral scholars
	Clinical research fellows



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Research News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant' 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Research

                                Learn how we are fueling innovation 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Education 
                
                    
                        	MD program
	PA Programs
	PhD programs
	Masters programs
	Continuing Medical Education
	Postdoctoral scholars
	Residencies & fellowships
	High School & Undergraduate Programs
	See all
	Education Resources

	Academic profiles
	School Administration
	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Alumni services
	Faculty resources
	Diversity programs
	Lane Library
	Student resources



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Education News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Alice L. Walton School of Medicine and Stanford Medicine host AI conference on community health 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Education 

                                Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Give 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Support Stanford Medicine

                            
                        

                        	Support teaching, research, and patient care.  

	Ways to give
	Why giving matters
	Make a gift online



                        
                            
                                Support Children's Health

                            
                        

                        
                            	Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health 

	Ways to give
	How your gift helps
	Make an online gift


                        
                        
                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                About 
                
                    
                        	About us
	News
	Contacts
	Maps & directions
	Leadership
	Vision
	Diversity
	Global health
	Community engagement
	Events
	How you can help



                        
                            Stanford School of Medicine

                            Stanford Health Care

                            Stanford Children's Health

                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                
                
                Site Search
                
                    


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

                

            


    
    
        


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

    












    
    
        	
        The 25
        
        The 25
	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma


            









  
    
  





  
    More

    










    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Aortic Regurgitation Exam


	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam


	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Carpal Tunnel Exam


	Cardiac Second Sounds  
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology: Learning the Language
	Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam


	Gait Abnormalities  


	Hand Exam 


	Hip Region Exam


	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements
	Knee Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Liver Exam


	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Veins & Wave Forms


	Newborn Jaundice












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Parkinson's Exam

 
	Pelvic Exam


	Precordial Movements
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure


	Rectal Exam
	Shoulder Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam


	Tongue Exam

 
	Thyroid Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    








  


            
          

          
        
	
        Blog
        
        Blog
	ArchiveArchive
	20232023
	Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside 
	Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA
	The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside
	Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care 
	How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese  
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Resources to Help Physicians Promote Skin Health
	Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge



	20222022
	Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness
	Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health
	Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine
	Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health
	How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing 
	How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations
	The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine
	How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer
	7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations
	Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside 



	20212021
	Registration is Now Open for the 2021 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 
	Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment
	The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic
	Teaching Empathy in Medical Education
	The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions
	Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam
	Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era



	20202020
	Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship
	Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care 
	 
	 



	20192019
	How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine
	Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU
	Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care
	Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside
	Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine 
	Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time
	Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes
	The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians
	The Art and Science of Patient Care
	Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine
	A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore
	Humanizing the EHR



	20182018
	What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?
	An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout
	The Spine Sign
	Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care
	Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo
	Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians
	Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside
	UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam
	Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine
	Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine
	The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins
	Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience
	The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery
	Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction
	Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity
	AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills
	The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care
	How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside
	Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills
	As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam
	Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine
	Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine
	AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside
	Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools
	Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner



	20172017
	Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia
	Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms 
	Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book
	Signs of Scleroderma
	can-improv-help-doctors
	conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum



	20162016
	What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?
	What is this Kussmaul’s sign?
	Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?
	Referred Pain Physical Exam
	Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?
	Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity 
	What is a roth spot?
	Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!
	Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing
	What is the Howell-Jolly body?
	What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?
	What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?
	What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?
	What is rhinophyma?
	What is the ugly duckling sign?
	Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.
	What is the exam of calciphylaxis?
	Stanford Medicine 25 Launches New Website
	Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam
	What is skin coining (Gua sha)?



	20152015
	Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957
	Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview
	Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam
	What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?
	Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |
	The Saddle Nose - Overview
	 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 2015
	COMING OUT OF THE COLD
	Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes



	20132013
	Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?
	Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor
	Congratulations to our ACP Winners!
	Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?
	An interesting illustration of the physical exam
	If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?
	A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?
	Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd
	Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?
	This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?
	Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!
	A patient asks you… what is this?
	Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?
	Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?
	The History of Pulsus Paradoxus
	Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus
	Remember this finding???
	Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!
	Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese
	Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!
	Teaching the teachers… Our methods.
	What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?
	Abdominal Wall Pain
	Do you know what this is???
	This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session
	Examination of the Trachea
	Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2
	The History of the Reflex Hammer
	Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford
	Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!
	Stanford Medicine 25 Clinical Pearl Award
	11 Facts About Sir William Osler
	Know your tremor?
	Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm



	20242024
	Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination
	Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why 
	Books On Bedside Medicine: Stanford Medicine 25’s Summer Reading List 
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD
	Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside
	9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Top Podcast Picks
	Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort
	Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch
	Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease






	CategoriesCategories
	Cardiology
	Dermatology
	Endocrinology
	Extremities
	Gastroenterology/Hepatology
	Gynecology/Women's Health
	Hematology/oncology
	History
	Neurology
	News
	Ophthalmology
	Perspective
	Pulmonary
	Rheumatology
	Technology





            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        Video Gallery
        
        
        
	
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
        
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Newborn Cardiac Examination 


            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        About
        
        About
	Symposium
	Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams
	TedMed
	Blog Overview
	Body as Text: Teaching Physical Examination Skills | Stanford Medicine 25
	Contact


            









  






            
          

          
        


    
    





  






  
    










    
    
        
    
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Approach to the Exam for Diastolic Murmurs
	    
    

  
  
    
Diastolic murmurs are commonly encountered findings on the auscultation of the heart, both in the outpatient and inpatient setting.  The physical exam, when performed correctly, can by itself help determine the underlying cause of a diastolic murmur.

  
  
 





                    
                
            

        

    

    

  













share

    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    













    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        










    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Introduction
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Diastolic Murmurs 

  
  
 














    Diastolic murmurs are always a pathological finding on the auscultation of the heart, indicating the presence of a valvular abnormality. The physical exam can, by itself, reveal the cause of a diastolic murmur. However, it is very important to perform the physical exam with the right technique in order to maximize our chances to identify a diastolic murmur and determine its cause. On this page we will review the four most common types of diastolic murmurs with a particular focus on their causes and the best approach to the physical exam. We will also briefly review some of the most common causes for a continuous murmur.  











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  














 








    
    
        

            

            

            

            

            

             

             

             

            

            
                
             

            
                
             

            

            

              

            

                       

            
            
                
                
            

        
    













    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Aortic Regurgitation
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Diastolic Murmurs 

  
  
 














    There are multiple causes for aortic regurgitation. One approach to classify them could be to differentiate between acute and chronic processes. The most important causes of acute aortic regurgitation are infective endocarditis and aortic dissection. Instead, the most common causes of chronic aortic regurgitation are aortic root dilation secondary to chronic hypertension and calcific degenerative aortic valve disease.




















     

Auscultation technique

The murmur of aortic regurgitation is loudest at the left lower sternal border, around the 3rd and 4th intercostal spaces. Also, any maneuver that brings the heart closer to the chest wall will increase the intensity of this murmur. To do this, the best approach is to ask the patient to sit upright on the examination table, lean forward and hold the breath in full expiration. If the diastolic murmur is caused by aortic regurgitation it should increase in intensity with these maneuvers.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Auscultate at the LLSB with the patient sitting upright.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Bounding arterial pulse

In a patient with aortic regurgitation there is an increase in the differential blood pressure (systolic blood pressure – diastolic blood pressure). This is caused by both an increase in the SBP, secondary to a greater stroke volume, and also by a reduction of the DBP as a consequence of the regurgitant blood flow during diastole. The increased differential pressure manifests as a bounding arterial pulse that can be appreciated basically at any artery around the body. For this reason, there are many different peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation, based on the specific artery considered. The most famous ones are the Corrigan’s pulse, visible at the carotids, and the Water-Hammer pulse, that can be observed at the wrists. 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Bounding pulse in the carotids (Corrigan’s pulse).



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        










    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Bounding pulse at the ulnar and radial arteries (Water-Hammer Pulse).



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     

For a more in-depth review of the exam for aortic regurgitation please check out our dedicated page!











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Pulmonary Regurgitation
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Diastolic Murmurs 

  
  
 














    Pulmonary regurgitation is a relatively rare cause of a diastolic murmur, and it is usually due to either infectious endocarditis or pulmonary hypertension. In the first case, there is direct damage to the valve leaflets caused by an infectious process. In the second case, instead, there is a dilation of the pulmonary artery root that causes the valve to become incompetent.

 




















     

Differentiation from aortic regurgitation

The diastolic murmur of pulmonary regurgitation is very similar to the one of aortic regurgitation. It is a decrescendo diastolic murmur with a blowing character. However, contrary to the one of aortic regurgitation, this murmur is loudest at the left upper sternal border, around the 2nd and 3rd intercostal spaces. Because of their similarity, it can be very difficult to differentiate between these two murmurs relying on auscultation alone. The key differential element is the presence of a peripheral arterial bounding pulse, that only patients with aortic regurgitation will demonstrate. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Differences between aortic and pulmonic regurgitation.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        



                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Mitral Stenosis
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Diastolic Murmurs 

  
  
 














    One of the most common causes of a diastolic murmur is mitral stenosis. It is the most common manifestation of rheumatic heart disease, which is also the main etiology of mitral stenosis. Other less frequent causes of mitral stenosis are atrial myxoma, calcific annular degeneration of the mitral valve and congenital causes, which are seen mostly in the pediatric population. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Auscultation technique

The murmur of mitral stenosis is heard loudest at the 5th intercostal space on the midclavicular line, approximately around the area of the left nipple. Also, it is heard best using the bell of the stethoscope and with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position. This murmur presents as a low-pitched diastolic rumble usually preceded by an opening snap, which is an extra sound heard soon after S2. 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Auscultation for mitral stenosis: correct patient positioning.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        











    











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Tricuspid Stenosis
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Diastolic Murmurs 

  
  
 














    Tricuspid stenosis is the rarest of all causes for a diastolic murmur. Usually, it is found in patients with rheumatic heart disease. In this case, the patients will also have either mitral valve disease, aortic valve disease or both, making it hard to appreciate the murmur of tricuspid stenosis. The most important cause of isolated tricuspid stenosis is instead carcinoid syndrome. 


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Auscultation technique

The murmur of tricuspid stenosis is heard best at the left lower sternal border using the bell of the stethoscope, similarly to the murmur of mitral stenosis. Also, we can increase the intensity of the tricuspid stenosis murmur by asking the patient to take a deep breath, thus increasing the blood flow to the right side of the heart and across the stenotic valve. Lastly, in isolated tricuspid stenosis there will be a fixed split S1, secondary to the delayed closure of the stenotic tricuspid valve.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Auscultation for tricuspid stenosis.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        











    











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Continuous Murmurs
	    
    

  
  
    Exam for Diastolic Murmurs 

  
  
 














    It is important to differentiate diastolic and systolic murmurs from continuous murmurs, that are heard both in systole and in diastole. We will briefly describe two of the most common causes of a continuous murmur, that are the patent ductus arteriosus and pericarditis.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Patent ductus arteriosus

The ductus arteriosus connects the pulmonary artery and the aorta during fetal life, allowing the passage of oxygenated blood from the right to the left side of the heart. Normally it closes right after birth when the pressure in the pulmonary circulation increases. However, if the ductus arteriosus stays open it will be possible to appreciate a continuous murmur that is loudest at the left infraclavicular area. This murmur is continuous since the blood pressure in the aorta is higher than the pressure in the pulmonary artery both during systole and during diastole. This allows for a continuous blood flow across the defect. 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    












                
            

            
                
                    Patent Ductus Arteriosus (credit to the American Heart Association).



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        











    











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












     

Pericarditis

In patients with pericarditis, it is often possible to auscultate a pericardial friction rub, generated by the attrition between the inflamed layers of the pericardium during the cardiac cycle. Since the pericardial layers are always in contact with one another, the friction rub will be heard both in systole and in diastole. Even though not technically considered a murmur, it can be easily mistaken for one. However, its grainy quality helps to distinguish the pericardial friction rub from a murmur.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    



    


    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    









                
            

            
                
                    Pericarditis (credit to medlineplus.gov)



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        











    











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















    
    
        
    


    




    








    
        
    
    





    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    







    
    
    
    
        
            
            
                

            
        
    
    
    
        
            
                
            

        

    

    
        








	



	
		
	
	
	



	Key Learning Points


    

    
        Learn the diastolic murmurs exam aspects that include: 

	aortic regurgitation


	pulmonary regurgitation


	mitral stenosis




 



        
    

    














    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Related to Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    	Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	Cardiac Second Sounds
	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  





















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    The Stanford Medicine 25
	    
    

  
  
  
 


	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam
	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Cardiac Second Sounds
	Carpal Tunnel Exam
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam (Ophthalmoscopy)
	Gait Abnormalities
	Hand Exam
	Hip Region Exam
	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples
	Knee Exam
	Liver Exam
	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Vein Exam
	Newborn Jaundice Assessment 
	Pelvic Exam
	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Measurement Techniques
	Rectal Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam
	Thyroid Exam
	Tongue Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Visit the 25
	Shoulder Exam Tutorial
	Parkinson's Disease Exam
	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Modified Sarnat Exam for Neonatal Encephalopathy
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	Rapid Assessment of a Newborn
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma








                    
                
            

        

    

    








  









  











    
    
        
















    
    Stanford Medicine 25

        
            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Learn more about Stanford 25.

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    The 25

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Video Gallery

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Annual Symposium

                
            

            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Blog

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Recent Posts

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Archive

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Categories

                
            

        

        
            Stanford School of Medicine

            
            
            
                About

                Contact

                Maps & Directions

                Careers

            

            
                Basic Science Departments

                Clinical Science Departments

                Academic Programs

                Vision

            

        

    





            
        


        
             Find People
        

        
             Visit Stanford
        

        
             Search Clinical Trials
        

        
             Give a Gift
        


    

















    
        
            ©2025 Stanford University

            
            
                	
                        Privacy Policy
                    
	
                        Terms of Use
                    
	
                        Accessibility
                    
	
                        Non-Discrimination
                    
	
                        
                            See us on Facebook
                        
                    
	
                        
                            See us on X (Twitter)
                        
                    


            


        

    




    
    



  





  
    Non-Discrimination

    
      Stanford complies with all applicable civil rights laws and does not engage in illegal preferences or discrimination.
      

      Stanford's Non-Discrimination Policy
    

  



  	
      Stanford University
    
	
      Stanford School of Medicine
    
	
      Stanford Health Care
    
	
      Stanford Children's Health
    
	
      Stanford Health Care Tri-Valley
    
	
      Stanford Medicine Partners
    





  

  









  


