
  







    
        













    



  








  
  
    






























    
        
    
    










    Skip to Content



    Stanford Medicine
    
        
            Stanford Medicine 25
            
                –
                Promoting the Culture of Bedside Medicine
            
        
    
    
    
        Site Nav
        
            
            Menu
        

    














    An Initiative of the Program for Bedside Medicine

    
        	
                    
                        See us on youtube
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on facebook
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on twitter
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on linkedin
                        
                    
                


    

























    

        
            













        



    Stanford Medicine

        Explore Stanford Medicine


        	
                Health Care 
                
                
                    
                        	
                            Find a doctor

	Adult-care doctor
	Pediatrician or pediatric specialist
	Obstetrician
	Clinics & Services

	Adult care
	Pediatric care
	Obstetrics
	Clinical trials



                        
                            	Locations

	Stanford Health Care
	Stanford Children's Health
	Emergency Department
	Dial 911 in the event of a medical emergency


                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Health Care

                                Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Research 
                
                    
                        	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Institutes
	Research centers
	See full directory
	Research Resources

	Research administration
	Academic profiles
	Clinical trials
	Funding opportunities
	See all
	Professional Training

	Postdoctoral scholars
	Clinical research fellows



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Research News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant' 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Research

                                Learn how we are fueling innovation 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Education 
                
                    
                        	MD program
	PA Programs
	PhD programs
	Masters programs
	Continuing Medical Education
	Postdoctoral scholars
	Residencies & fellowships
	High School & Undergraduate Programs
	See all
	Education Resources

	Academic profiles
	School Administration
	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Alumni services
	Faculty resources
	Diversity programs
	Lane Library
	Student resources



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Education News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Alice L. Walton School of Medicine and Stanford Medicine host AI conference on community health 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Education 

                                Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Give 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Support Stanford Medicine

                            
                        

                        	Support teaching, research, and patient care.  

	Ways to give
	Why giving matters
	Make a gift online



                        
                            
                                Support Children's Health

                            
                        

                        
                            	Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health 

	Ways to give
	How your gift helps
	Make an online gift


                        
                        
                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                About 
                
                    
                        	About us
	News
	Contacts
	Maps & directions
	Leadership
	Vision
	Diversity
	Global health
	Community engagement
	Events
	How you can help



                        
                            Stanford School of Medicine

                            Stanford Health Care

                            Stanford Children's Health

                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                
                
                Site Search
                
                    


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

                

            


    
    
        


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

    












    
    
        	
        The 25
        
        The 25
	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma


            









  
    
  





  
    More

    










    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Aortic Regurgitation Exam


	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam


	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Carpal Tunnel Exam


	Cardiac Second Sounds  
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology: Learning the Language
	Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam


	Gait Abnormalities  


	Hand Exam 


	Hip Region Exam


	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements
	Knee Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Liver Exam


	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Veins & Wave Forms


	Newborn Jaundice












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Parkinson's Exam

 
	Pelvic Exam


	Precordial Movements
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure


	Rectal Exam
	Shoulder Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam


	Tongue Exam

 
	Thyroid Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    








  


            
          

          
        
	
        Blog
        
        Blog
	ArchiveArchive
	20232023
	Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside 
	Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA
	The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside
	Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care 
	How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese  
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Resources to Help Physicians Promote Skin Health
	Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge



	20222022
	Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness
	Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health
	Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine
	Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health
	How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing 
	How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations
	The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine
	How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer
	7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations
	Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside 



	20212021
	Registration is Now Open for the 2021 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 
	Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment
	The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic
	Teaching Empathy in Medical Education
	The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions
	Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam
	Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era



	20202020
	Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship
	Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care 
	 
	 



	20192019
	How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine
	Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU
	Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care
	Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside
	Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine 
	Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time
	Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes
	The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians
	The Art and Science of Patient Care
	Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine
	A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore
	Humanizing the EHR



	20182018
	What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?
	An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout
	The Spine Sign
	Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care
	Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo
	Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians
	Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside
	UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam
	Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine
	Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine
	The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins
	Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience
	The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery
	Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction
	Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity
	AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills
	The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care
	How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside
	Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills
	As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam
	Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine
	Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine
	AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside
	Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools
	Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner



	20172017
	Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia
	Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms 
	Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book
	Signs of Scleroderma
	can-improv-help-doctors
	conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum



	20162016
	What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?
	What is this Kussmaul’s sign?
	Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?
	Referred Pain Physical Exam
	Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?
	Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity 
	What is a roth spot?
	Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!
	Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing
	What is the Howell-Jolly body?
	What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?
	What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?
	What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?
	What is rhinophyma?
	What is the ugly duckling sign?
	Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.
	What is the exam of calciphylaxis?
	Stanford Medicine 25 Launches New Website
	Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam
	What is skin coining (Gua sha)?



	20152015
	Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957
	Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview
	Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam
	What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?
	Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |
	The Saddle Nose - Overview
	 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 2015
	COMING OUT OF THE COLD
	Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes



	20132013
	Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?
	Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor
	Congratulations to our ACP Winners!
	Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?
	An interesting illustration of the physical exam
	If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?
	A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?
	Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd
	Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?
	This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?
	Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!
	A patient asks you… what is this?
	Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?
	Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?
	The History of Pulsus Paradoxus
	Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus
	Remember this finding???
	Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!
	Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese
	Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!
	Teaching the teachers… Our methods.
	What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?
	Abdominal Wall Pain
	Do you know what this is???
	This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session
	Examination of the Trachea
	Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2
	The History of the Reflex Hammer
	Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford
	Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!
	Stanford Medicine 25 Clinical Pearl Award
	11 Facts About Sir William Osler
	Know your tremor?
	Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm



	20242024
	Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination
	Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why 
	Books On Bedside Medicine: Stanford Medicine 25’s Summer Reading List 
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD
	Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside
	9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Top Podcast Picks
	Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort
	Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch
	Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease






	CategoriesCategories
	Cardiology
	Dermatology
	Endocrinology
	Extremities
	Gastroenterology/Hepatology
	Gynecology/Women's Health
	Hematology/oncology
	History
	Neurology
	News
	Ophthalmology
	Perspective
	Pulmonary
	Rheumatology
	Technology





            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        Video Gallery
        
        
        
	
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
        
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Newborn Cardiac Examination 


            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        About
        
        About
	Symposium
	Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams
	TedMed
	Blog Overview
	Body as Text: Teaching Physical Examination Skills | Stanford Medicine 25
	Contact


            









  






            
          

          
        


    
    





  






  
    










    
    
        
    
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Approach to the Hip Region Exam
	    
    

  
  
    Hip pain is really common. Sometimes the pain is coming from the hip joint. Other times, pain may be coming from other surrounding causes. Here, we'll review all causes of pain in the hip region and show you the exam to diagnose each one.

  
  
 





                    
                
            

        

    

    

  













share

    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    













    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        










    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Introduction
	    
    

  
  
    Pain in the Hip Region

  
  
 














    Before we can review the exam of the hip, it's important to know the possible diagnoses. That way you're going through each exam maneuver unique to each specific diagnosis. To aid in the process, it's helpful to organize your diagnoses into three locations: anterior, lateral and posterior.


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    












                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Differential Diagnoses of Regional Hip Pain

Anterior

	Hip Joint Disease, including:	Osteoarthritis
	Neck Fracture
	Septic Arthritis
	Femoral-Acetabular Syndrome
	Avascular Necrosis



	Meralgia Paresthetica (can be anterior and/or lateral)


 

Lateral 

	Greater Trochanteric Bursitis
	External Snapping Hip


 

Posterior

	Radiculopathy (visit Low Back Exam page)
	Sacroiliitis or Sacraliliac Joint Pain
	Piriformis Syndrome












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  














 








    
    
        

            

            

            

            

            

             

             

             

            

            
                
             

            
                
             

            

            

              

            

                       

            
            
                
                
            

        
    













    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Hip Joint Disease
	    
    

  
  
    Anterior Region

  
  
 














    	Pain coming from the hip joint usually presents in the anterior region. As noted above, there are a number of problems that could arise in the hip joint (e.g. osteoarthritis, neck fracture, septic arthritis femoral-acetabular syndrome and avascular necrosis). Together with the exam noted below, once you are able to localize the pain to the hip joint, you can use other data (e.g. vitals, labs and imaging) to help with the specific diagnosis. 
	Below are the number of exam manuevers used to localize pain to the hip joint.
	Click this link to jump to the section on anterior hip pain in the video.



















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Log Rolling Test

The log rolling test can be helpful if you suspect a hip fracture. It is done by simply rolling the leg side-to-side while the patient is supine. 











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  

















    


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Compression Test at the Foot

The compression test is done by hitting the balls of the feet to transmit pressure towards the hip while the leg is lifted. Again, this can be very painful in a hip fracture.











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        





    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  

















    


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Compression Test at the Knee (and Lateral Hip)

The compression test can also be done by tapping at the knee, again transmitting pressure towards the hip. Finally, you can also by tap lateral to the hip (see video for demonstration). All compression tests can be positive in hip pain but especially with a fracture. If positive, hip x-rays (and possibly more imaging) should be ordered.











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        





    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  

















    


















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Range of Motion of Hip Joint

Video demonstration to test range of motion. 

Tests for range of motion look for pain in the hip joint as the ball-and-socket joint of the hip is activated. The most common cause of pain with range of motion is osteoarthritis (or degenerative joint disease) of the hip but again any of the problems of the hip listed above will likey cause pain during range of motion and/or limitation in range of movement. 

Some of these motions include:

	Flexing both hip and knee at 90 degress, then rotating back-and-forth both interally and externally to approx 45 degrees.
	Flexing the hip and knee beyond 90 degress to the extremes of range of motion and rotating from side-to-side












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Range of motion at 90 degrees hip and knee flexion.



                

            
        

        

    



























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    Extreme range of motion beyond 90 degrees hip and knee flexion.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Meralgia Paresthetica
	    
    

  
  
    Anterior/Lateral Region

  
  
 














    If your patient complains of anterior (sometimes anterior and lateral) thigh pain, the diagnoses may be meralgia paresthetica. This diagnosis is usually caused by entrapment of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve as it passes under the inguinal ligament and supplies the sensory distribution of the anterior/lateral thigh. 

The pain is often described as burning. There may be an associated paresthesia (numbness and/or tingling) and sometimes a decrease in sensation. Therefore, a sensory exam should be performed in the region. Meralgia paresthetica is more common in diabetics.

	Click this link to jump to the section in the video.



















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    















                
            

            
                
                    Crediit



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Greater Trochanteric Bursitis
	    
    

  
  
    Lateral Region

  
  
 












    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Greater trochanteric bursitis consists of pain over the lateral side of the hip. The diagnosis of greater trochanteric bursitis is diagnosed by asking the patient to lay on the side (painful side up) and palpating over the burse of the greater trochanter. Tenderness should be appreciated. Pain is often self-limiting but can also be treated with NSAIDs. 











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    External Snapping Hip
	    
    

  
  
    Lateral Region

  
  
 












    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Greater trochanteric bursitis has more recently been thought to be part of a greater trochanteric pain syndrome that includes the tendons that insert and cross over the greater trochanter such as the iliotibial band which traverses the lateral hip and if inflammed could cause a "snap" during movement as the hip flexes and extends.

To test for an external stapping hip, with the patient on their side (painful side up), you will grab the whole leg then flex and extend the leg while palpating the iliotibal tendon (near the greater trochanter) and feeling for a popping or snapping that may be associated with pain. Link to video demonstrating this. 











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Lumber Radiculopathy
	    
    

  
  
    Posterior Region

  
  
 














    A very common cause of posterior pain near the buttocks is caused by radiculopathy as the nerves exit the lumber spine. That topic is covered in our page on the Approach to Low Back Pain here. 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Sacroiliitis / Sacraliliac Joint Pain
	    
    

  
  
    Posterior Region

  
  
 












    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Pain at the sacroiliac joint is often in the posterior or buttocks region. Pain in the sacroiliac joint can be elicited with the FAbER Test. FAbER stands for Flexion, Abduction and External Rotation. Once the leg is flexed, abducted and externally rotated (as noted in image below), you will apply a downward pressure at the knee. The presence of pain in the posterior (or buttocks) region suggests pain from the sacroiliac joint.

Link to video demonstrating this. 











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        





    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    















                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  






























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Piriformis Syndrome
	    
    

  
  
    Posterior Region

  
  
 












    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    Piriformis syndrome occurs when the piriformis muscle compresses the sciatic nerve. Tests for piriformis sydrome are attempting to move the leg so that the piriformis muscle pushes against the sciatic nerve leading to pain and thus a positive test. 

Link to video demonstrating this. 











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
        





    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    















                
            

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    In the first manuver, keeping the leg straight, flex the hip up to 90 degrees, looking for pain in the posterior/buttocks region. 



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        
























    




    
    
        
    




    

    
    
    
        








  
  
      
  

    
    
    
    
    
        
        
            
            
                
                    
                
                
            

            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            

            
                
                
                
                
                
                    
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
            


            

            
                
                
                    



























                
            

            
                
                    In the second manuver, keeping the hip flexed, flex the knee and adduct the knee accross the body of the patient, again looking for pain in the the posterior/buttocks region.



                

            
        

        

    






                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Consult the Expert on Regional Hip Pain
	    
    

  
  
  
 






























    
    
        
    



    
        
        
        
    
    




    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    







    
        
            
            
                
                    



























                

            
        
    

    
        Baldeep Singh

Dr. Baldeep Singh is a Clinical Professor at Stanford University and the Vice Chair for Academic Affairs for the Division of Primary Care and Population Health. He is involved in a number of clinical teaching roles at Stanford's School of Medicine and an active member of the Stanford Medicine 25 team with a special expertise in the exam of the lower back and regional hip pain.

Clinical Pearl

As you see from this page, most of what we refer to as "hip pain", doesn't involve the hip joint. Remember, if the pain is lateral or posterior (near buttocks), look for the other causes of pain that don't involve the hip joint.


        
    








                    
                
            

        

    

    

  









                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















    
    
        
    


    




    








    
        
    
    





    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    







    
    
    
    
        
            
            
                

            
        
    
    
    
        
            
                
            

        

    

    
        








	



	
		
	
	
	



	Key Learning Points


    

    
        Learn the approach to regional hip pain that includes:

	Knowing the differential diagnoses
	Knowing each unique exam that will confirm or exclude each diagnosis


 



        
    

    














    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Related to Low Back Exam
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    	Low Back Exam, Approach to
	Shoulder Exam
	Knee Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  





















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    The Stanford Medicine 25
	    
    

  
  
  
 


	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam
	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Cardiac Second Sounds
	Carpal Tunnel Exam
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam (Ophthalmoscopy)
	Gait Abnormalities
	Hand Exam
	Hip Region Exam
	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples
	Knee Exam
	Liver Exam
	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Vein Exam
	Newborn Jaundice Assessment 
	Pelvic Exam
	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Measurement Techniques
	Rectal Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam
	Thyroid Exam
	Tongue Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Visit the 25
	Shoulder Exam Tutorial
	Parkinson's Disease Exam
	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Modified Sarnat Exam for Neonatal Encephalopathy
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	Rapid Assessment of a Newborn
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma








                    
                
            

        

    

    








  









  











    
    
        
















    
    Stanford Medicine 25

        
            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Learn more about Stanford 25.

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    The 25

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Video Gallery

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Annual Symposium

                
            

            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Blog

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Recent Posts

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Archive

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Categories

                
            

        

        
            Stanford School of Medicine

            
            
            
                About

                Contact

                Maps & Directions

                Careers

            

            
                Basic Science Departments

                Clinical Science Departments

                Academic Programs

                Vision

            

        

    





            
        


        
             Find People
        

        
             Visit Stanford
        

        
             Search Clinical Trials
        

        
             Give a Gift
        


    

















    
        
            ©2025 Stanford University

            
            
                	
                        Privacy Policy
                    
	
                        Terms of Use
                    
	
                        Accessibility
                    
	
                        Non-Discrimination
                    
	
                        
                            See us on Facebook
                        
                    
	
                        
                            See us on X (Twitter)
                        
                    


            


        

    




    
    



  





  
    Non-Discrimination

    
      Stanford complies with all applicable civil rights laws and does not engage in illegal preferences or discrimination.
      

      Stanford's Non-Discrimination Policy
    

  



  	
      Stanford University
    
	
      Stanford School of Medicine
    
	
      Stanford Health Care
    
	
      Stanford Children's Health
    
	
      Stanford Health Care Tri-Valley
    
	
      Stanford Medicine Partners
    





  

  









  


