
  







    
        













    



  








  
  
    






























    
        
    
    










    Skip to Content



    Stanford Medicine
    
        
            Stanford Medicine 25
            
                –
                Promoting the Culture of Bedside Medicine
            
        
    
    
    
        Site Nav
        
            
            Menu
        

    














    An Initiative of the Program for Bedside Medicine

    
        	
                    
                        See us on youtube
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on facebook
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on twitter
                        
                    
                
	
                    
                        See us on linkedin
                        
                    
                


    

























    

        
            













        



    Stanford Medicine

        Explore Stanford Medicine


        	
                Health Care 
                
                
                    
                        	
                            Find a doctor

	Adult-care doctor
	Pediatrician or pediatric specialist
	Obstetrician
	Clinics & Services

	Adult care
	Pediatric care
	Obstetrics
	Clinical trials



                        
                            	Locations

	Stanford Health Care
	Stanford Children's Health
	Emergency Department
	Dial 911 in the event of a medical emergency


                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Health Care

                                Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Research 
                
                    
                        	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Institutes
	Research centers
	See full directory
	Research Resources

	Research administration
	Academic profiles
	Clinical trials
	Funding opportunities
	See all
	Professional Training

	Postdoctoral scholars
	Clinical research fellows



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Research News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant' 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Research

                                Learn how we are fueling innovation 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Education 
                
                    
                        	MD program
	PA Programs
	PhD programs
	Masters programs
	Continuing Medical Education
	Postdoctoral scholars
	Residencies & fellowships
	High School & Undergraduate Programs
	See all
	Education Resources

	Academic profiles
	School Administration
	Basic science departments
	Clinical science departments
	Alumni services
	Faculty resources
	Diversity programs
	Lane Library
	Student resources



                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        Education News

                                        
                                            
                                        
                                        Alice L. Walton School of Medicine and Stanford Medicine host AI conference on community health 

                                    
                                
                            
                        

                        
                            
                                Explore Education 

                                Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders 

                            
                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                Give 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Support Stanford Medicine

                            
                        

                        	Support teaching, research, and patient care.  

	Ways to give
	Why giving matters
	Make a gift online



                        
                            
                                Support Children's Health

                            
                        

                        
                            	Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health 

	Ways to give
	How your gift helps
	Make an online gift


                        
                        
                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                About 
                
                    
                        	About us
	News
	Contacts
	Maps & directions
	Leadership
	Vision
	Diversity
	Global health
	Community engagement
	Events
	How you can help



                        
                            Stanford School of Medicine

                            Stanford Health Care

                            Stanford Children's Health

                        

                         Back
                    
                

            
	
                
                
                Site Search
                
                    


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

                

            


    
    
        


    
    
        
  





  



  


  






  
     Close menu
    

  
  

    












    
    
        	
        The 25
        
        The 25
	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma


            









  
    
  





  
    More

    










    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Aortic Regurgitation Exam


	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam


	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Carpal Tunnel Exam


	Cardiac Second Sounds  
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology: Learning the Language
	Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam


	Gait Abnormalities  


	Hand Exam 


	Hip Region Exam


	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements
	Knee Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Liver Exam


	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Veins & Wave Forms


	Newborn Jaundice












                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        












    	Parkinson's Exam

 
	Pelvic Exam


	Precordial Movements
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure


	Rectal Exam
	Shoulder Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam


	Tongue Exam

 
	Thyroid Exam












                    
                
            

        

    

    








  


            
          

          
        
	
        Blog
        
        Blog
	ArchiveArchive
	20232023
	Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside 
	Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA
	The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside
	Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care 
	How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese  
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Resources to Help Physicians Promote Skin Health
	Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge



	20222022
	Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness
	Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health
	Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine
	Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health
	How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing 
	How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations
	The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine
	How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer
	7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations
	Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside 



	20212021
	Registration is Now Open for the 2021 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 
	Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment
	The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic
	Teaching Empathy in Medical Education
	The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions
	Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam
	Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era



	20202020
	Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship
	Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care 
	 
	 



	20192019
	How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine
	Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU
	Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care
	Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside
	Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine 
	Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time
	Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes
	The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians
	The Art and Science of Patient Care
	Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine
	A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore
	Humanizing the EHR



	20182018
	What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?
	An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout
	The Spine Sign
	Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care
	Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo
	Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians
	Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside
	UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam
	Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium
	Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine
	Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine
	The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins
	Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience
	The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium
	The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery
	Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction
	Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity
	AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills
	The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care
	How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside
	Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills
	As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam
	Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine
	Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine
	AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside
	Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools
	Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner



	20172017
	Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia
	Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms 
	Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book
	Signs of Scleroderma
	can-improv-help-doctors
	conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum



	20162016
	What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?
	What is this Kussmaul’s sign?
	Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?
	Referred Pain Physical Exam
	Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?
	Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity 
	What is a roth spot?
	Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!
	Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing
	What is the Howell-Jolly body?
	What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?
	What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?
	What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?
	What is rhinophyma?
	What is the ugly duckling sign?
	Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.
	What is the exam of calciphylaxis?
	Stanford Medicine 25 Launches New Website
	Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam
	What is skin coining (Gua sha)?



	20152015
	Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium
	The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957
	Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview
	Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam
	What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?
	Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |
	The Saddle Nose - Overview
	 Stanford Medicine 25 Skills Symposium 2015
	COMING OUT OF THE COLD
	Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes



	20132013
	Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?
	Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor
	Congratulations to our ACP Winners!
	Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?
	An interesting illustration of the physical exam
	If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?
	A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?
	Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd
	Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?
	This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?
	Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!
	A patient asks you… what is this?
	Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?
	Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?
	The History of Pulsus Paradoxus
	Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus
	Remember this finding???
	Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!
	Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese
	Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!
	Teaching the teachers… Our methods.
	What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?
	Abdominal Wall Pain
	Do you know what this is???
	This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session
	Examination of the Trachea
	Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2
	The History of the Reflex Hammer
	Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford
	Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!
	Stanford Medicine 25 Clinical Pearl Award
	11 Facts About Sir William Osler
	Know your tremor?
	Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm



	20242024
	Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination
	Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why 
	Books On Bedside Medicine: Stanford Medicine 25’s Summer Reading List 
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD
	Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD
	Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside
	9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive
	Stanford Medicine 25’s Top Podcast Picks
	Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort
	Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch
	Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease






	CategoriesCategories
	Cardiology
	Dermatology
	Endocrinology
	Extremities
	Gastroenterology/Hepatology
	Gynecology/Women's Health
	Hematology/oncology
	History
	Neurology
	News
	Ophthalmology
	Perspective
	Pulmonary
	Rheumatology
	Technology





            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        Video Gallery
        
        
        
	
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
        
        The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Newborn Cardiac Examination 


            









  






            
          

          
        
	
        About
        
        About
	Symposium
	Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams
	TedMed
	Blog Overview
	Body as Text: Teaching Physical Examination Skills | Stanford Medicine 25
	Contact


            









  






            
          

          
        


    
    





  






  
    










    
    
        
    
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis
	    
    

  
  
    Involuntary movements compose a group of uncontrolled movements that may manifest as a tremor, tic, myoclonic jerk, chorea, athetosis, dystonia or hemiballism. The underlying causes and observation of these diagnoses are reviewed here.

  
  
 





                    
                
            

        

    

    

  













share

    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    


    
    
        
    













    
        
    
    
    
    
    


    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













    
        

        
            
                
                
                    
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        










    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Types of Involuntary Movements
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Involuntary movements compose a group of uncontrolled movements that may manifest as a tremor, tic, myoclonic jerk, chorea, athetosis, dystonia or hemiballism. 

Recognition of involuntary movements associated with hyperkinetic movement disorders is an important diagnostic skill. This page describes the diagnosis of the major categories of hyperkinetic movement disorders.

General Definitions

	Tremor: Rhythmic oscillations caused by intermittent muscle contractions.
	Tics: Paroxysmal, stereotyped muscle contractions, commonly suppressible, might be simple (single muscle group) or complex. Temporarily suppressible.
	Myoclonus: Shock-like, arrhythmic twitches. Not suppressible.
	Chorea: Dance-like, unpatterned movements, often approximate a purpose (e.g. adjusting clothes, checking a watch). Often rapid and may involve proximal or distal muscle groups.
	Athetosis: Writhing movements, mostly of arms and hands. Often slow.
	Dystonia: Sustained or repetitious muscular contractions, often produces abnormal posture.
	Hemiballismus: wild, large-amplitude, flinging movements on one side of the body, commonly affecting proximal limb muscles but can also affect the trunk.


 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Approach to the Exam of Tremor
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Physiologic Tremor

	Present in almost everyone and a normal finding that usually cannot be seen unless worsened in certain situations that include:	anxiety, fear, physical exhaustion, hypoglycemia, hyperthyroidism, alcohol withdrawal





 

"Essential" Tremor (ET) (Kinetic Tremor / Familial Tremor)



	Most common involuntary movement disorder, typified by a rapid postural tremor most often of the upper extremities.
	Progressive, may appear at anytime of life but most commonly >70 years.
	Mainly a postural tremor but if worsened, will occur at rest
	Commonly bilateral and symmetric.
	Classically affects head and/or speech.
	Classically, tremor decreases with EtOH, worsens with stress.
	Neurological exam is otherwise normal.	Differentiate from Parkinson by noting absence of resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, etc.





 

Intention Tremor ( Cerebellar Tremor)

	Slow action tremor that most commonly occurs with purposeful movement (such as in doing finger to nose test)
	Usually associated with other cerebellar findings
	Seen in any process that causes damage to the cerebrellum (stroke, tumor, multiple sclerosis, chronic alcohol abuse, certain medications)
	Unlike the cerebrum, cerebellar disease causes problems on the SAME SIDE of the body as the the cerebellar lesion
	Titubation refers to tremor of the head (and sometimes trunk) due to cerebellar disease


 

Parkinsonian Tremor

	Most common cause of a resting tremor that usually involves the distal muscles (e.g. pill rolling tremor of the hand)
	May decrease with voluntary activity (e.g. raising arm) and increase with mental activity (e.g. asking patient to do math) and increase with anxiety or emotional excitement
	Causes:	Idiopathic parkinson's disease: usually starts in one hand then spreads to other limbs
	Drugs: antipsychotic agents, metoclopramide, prochloperazine
	Encephalitis (HIV/AIDS, neurosyphilis, PML, toxoplasmosis)
	Chronic head trauma



	Note: other resting tremors include Wilson's Disease and severe essential tremor (ET is usually postural but when servere can be seen at rest or even with movement)




















    








	 	Resting Tremor 	Postural Tremor	Action Tremor
	Description	Tremor when skeletal muscle is at rest.	Tremor when skeltal muscle holding in on position against gravity.	Tremor when in process of voluntary contraction of muscle.
	Physical Exam Test	Observe at rest. Observe while asking patient to do mental work (may increase).	Ask patient to extend arms and hold in mid air. 	Finger to nose, rapid alternating movements or heel to shin.
	Examples	Parkinson's disease, Parkinsonian tremor (e.g. medications)	Essential tremor, increase physiologic tremor (hyperthyroid, stimulants like caffiene or nicotine), Wilson's disease	Cerebellar disease, multiple sclerosis, chronic alcohol abuse






	Note: There can be overlap between these categories. For example, certain forms of Parkinson's disease will exhibit postural tremor. Conversely, severe essential tremor will be present at rest. It is important to look for other signs of the suspected diagnosis to make sure you don't miss the correct one!

















    
















 








    
    
        

            

            

            

            

            

             

             

             

            

            
                
             

            
                
             

            

            

              

            

                       

            
            
                
                
            

        
    






















    
        
    
    


    
    
        
    




    




  

    

    
      
		
        
        
        
        

        
            
                
					
                    
                    
                        
                          
                            Show video transcript
                            
                          
                          
                        

                    

                
            

            
                
                    












    Welcome to a Stanford Medicine 25 video on the approach to tremor.  The goal of  this video is to help you figure out what's causing your patient's tremor.  Let's start by reviewing the different categories of tremor.

The postural tremor is easy to find by asking your patient to hold their arms out. Causes include a normal physiologic tremor which can be increased in certain states such as sleep deprivation, too much caffeine or nicotine, alcohol withdrawal, increased metabolic states such as in hyperthyroidism and essential tremor.

This is an actual patient from Stanford hospital with a history of familial essential tremor. As you can see here arm straight out and held up in the air the tremor is persistent (as seen better here when zoomed in). Patients with essential tremor will oftentimes have a shakiness in their voice as well. If you listen really closely you can hear slight variation in this patient's voice.  (Patient vocalizes).

The resting tremor is simply examined at rest.  Causes include Parkinson's disease, drug-induced parkinsonism and less common supranuclear palsy. Here's a resting tremor in a patient with severe Parkinson's disease. If you look closely even his left leg has a tremor at rest.  A tremor is also seen in this patient’s face from the same disease.

The third and final category of tremor is the action tremor sometimes referred to as the kinetic or for our purposes the intention tremor, which occurs in essentially any type of movement. Causes include cerebellar lesions like a stroke or cellular mass, multiple sclerosis involving the cerebellum, or chronic alcohol abuse. And here's our patient with essential tremor demonstrating a normal finger to nose exam.  As you can see the patient is being asked to pick multiple areas to reach his finger out and extend it almost fully.

One last thing to mention: sometimes many of these causes of tremor can present with overlap.  For example a patient with a central tremor that's very severe can present not only with postural tremor but also resting and/or action tremor.

However together with a good history and exam you'll have a great chance of finding out the cause of your patient’s tremor.

This has been a Stanford Medicine 25 video on the approach to tremor. Thanks for watching. The preceding program is copyrighted by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.

Please visit us at med.stanford.edu.











                

            

        

      
    










                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Myoclonus
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Myoclonus may be benign (as in hypnopompic and hypnagogic jerks) or disabling. Myoclonic jerks may occur with voluntary movement (action myoclonus) or as a result of a stimulus (startle or reflex myoclonus). Unlike tics, myoclonus is not suppressible. Myoclonus is often associated with CNS pathology, hypoxic damage (e.g. during cardiac arrest), neurodegenerative disorders, and encephalopathy.

	Physiologic myoclonus is often normal in people, for example myoclonic jerks during sleep transitions.
	Epileptic myoclonus referred to myoclonus in the setting of epilepsy.
	Essential myoclonus is a familial condition typified by multifocal jerks, usually benign.
	Symptomatic (secondary) myoclonus refers to myoclonus that occurs secondary to neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's disease, Huntington disease, Lewy body dementia and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease.
	Negative myoclonus is the term sometimes used to contrast myoclonus. It represents short periods of loss of muscle tone most commonly seen in liver disease patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Is can also be seen in severe uremia and certain toxins (sometimes referred to as reversible myoclonus).












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Chorea
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Huntington's Disease

Huntington's chorea is arrhythmic, nonrepetitive, semi-purposeful and involves the limbs, trunk, and face. Early manifestations are mild and may be unnoticed or attributed to restlessness. Motor impersistence (e.g. inability to sustain tongue protrusion) is a common feature. See the Abnormal Gaits Page for description and demonstration of the Choriform gate.

 

Other Choreas

	Sydenham's chorea (aka Saint Vitus Dance) is one of the major diagostic criteria for Rheumatic fever seen in prior Group A Streptococcal infection. It is most common among female patients, 5-15 years old. Rare in the US but more common in developing countries.	Acute onset, choreiform movements, extreme restlessness.
	Most often self-limited.
	May reoccur, especially in pregnancy (chorea gravidarum).



	Neuroacanthocytosis is a rare, recessive, relentlessly progressive disorder typified by chorea coupled with erythrocyte abnormalities and possibly dystonia, tics, seizures, polyneuropathy, and self mutilation. May present at any time in life.	Similar presentation is noted in McLeod syndrome - an X-linked disorder associated with reactivity to Kell antigens, typically older patients.



	Paroxysmal chorea has been described in hyper- and hypoglycemia, vascular diseases, and infections.
	Benign senile chorea & benign inherited chorea of childhood have been described but are controversial. It is important to rule out HD.
	SLE and less commonly other autoimmune disorders may cause chorea.












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Tics
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Tourette's Syndrome (TS) is a neurobehavioral disorder predominately affecting males and typified by multiple motor tics and vocalizations. Such tics may be repressed for short periods of time or even become absent for days to weeks. Onset is most common before the age of 15 years and often lessens or even resolves in adulthood. TS is associated with anxiety, depression, ADHD, and OCD. Adult onset is associated with several medical conditions such as Parkinson's Disease, dystonia, drugs (e.g. neuroleptics, levodopa), and trauma.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Dystonia
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Dystonia exists in a broad spectrum from a contraction of a single muscle group to a disabling dysfunction of multiple groups. Commonly, dystonia is initiated by voluntary motion (action dystonia) but may later become sustained and extend to other body regions. Classically, stress or fatigue worsen dystonia, relaxation or sensory stimulation reduce it.

Primary Dystonias

	Idiopathic Torsion Dystonia (ITD), or Oppenheim's dystonia, is an autosomal dominant condition of variable penetrance seen most commonly in juvenile patients of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Commonly, onset begins in foot or arm before progressing to other limbs, head, and neck.
	Dopa Responsive Dystonia (DRD) is an autosomal dominant condition with an onset before 12 years of age that responds to levodopa.


 

Focal Dystonias

This is the most common type of dystonia, commonly presenting in the 4th to 6th decade of life, affecting females more than males. Frequently misdiagnosed as psychiatric or orthopedic conditions.

	Blepharospasm: abnormal contraction of eyelids, increased blinking can affect ADLs.
	Oromandibular dystonia (OMD): dystonic contractions of muscle groups of the jaw, tongue, lips, or lower face.	Oral facial dystonia commonly affects women > 60 years old with both OMD and blepharospasm.



	Cervical dystonia: dystonic neck muscle contraction, sometimes painful. May deviate head laterally (torticollis), anteriorly (anterocollis), or posteriorly (retrocollis). Sometimes associated with dystonic tremor and secondary cervical radiculopathy.
	Spasmodic dysphonia: dysfunctional contractions of the vocal cords.
	Limb dystonias: may present in either upper or lower extremities, often initiated by specific actions such as writing (writer's cramp) or laying a musical instrument (musician's dystonia).


 

Secondary Dystonias

Most commonly caused by medications (see below), brain lesions, or brainstem pathology. Most such dystonias are segmental in distribution. Less commonly, peripheral nerve injury may cause dystonia.

 

Dystonic Storm

Dystonic storm is an acute, generalized dystonic contraction that may include vocal cords or laryngeal muscles, leading to potentially fatal respiratory obstruction. Patients with a history of dystonia and subject to acute stress (such as surgery) are in jeopardy. Potential complications include rhabdomyolysis and renal failure. Dystonic storm is best managed in the ICU.

 











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Drug-Induced Movement Disorders
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Acute

	Most acute hyperkinetic drug reactions result in dystonia, typically generalized in children and focal in adults.
	Amphetamines, methylphenidate, and cocaine are known to cause chorea, tics, and stereotyped behaviors.


 

Subacute

	Most subacute reactions result in akathisia.


 

Tardive Syndromes

 

	Tardive dyskinesia (TD) most often develops months to years after antipsychotic treatment is initiated. Most often, TD presents with choriform movements of the mouth, tongue, and lips.	Lower risk of TD is conferred by youth and use of atypical antipsychotics. Increased risk is conferred by advanced age, toothlessness, and organic cerebral dysfunction.
	Roughly one third of TD cases resolve within 3 months of discontinuing the offending drug. Most other patients slowly improve over a course of years.



	Tardive dystonia is associated with chronic neuroleptic exposure and is typified by axial muscle involvement and a characteristic rocking motion. Tardive dystonia often persists after offending medication is discontinued and is refractory to therapy.
	Tardive akathisia and Tardive Tourette's syndrome are much less common but still associated with chronic antipsychotic exposure.


 

 

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is typified by rigidity, hyperthermia, AMS, tachycardia, and renal failure. Onset usually occurs days to weeks after exposure to medication. It might also be precipitated by discontinuation of antiparkinsonian medications.

 

Other drugs associated with hyperkinetic movement disorders include phenytoin, carbamazepine, TCAs, fluoxetine, oral contraceptives, buspirone, digoxin, cimetidien, diazoxide, lithium, methadone, and fentanyl.











                    
                
            

        

    

    

  
















    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Psychogenic Disorders
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    Psychogenic movement disorders are common and may mimic any of the conditions described above. Affected patients are most often female and debilitated by their condition. Particularly somatoform, conversion disorder, malingering, and factitious disorder are associated with psychogenic movements.

	Clinical features suggestive of a psychogenic cause:	Acute onset.
	Movement patterns inconsistent with known movement disorder.
	Variability of movements (often increasing with attention) and distractibility from movements (often decreasing when patient is asked to perform another task).
	Many organic movement disorders commonly worsen when patient is distracted and improve with attention.
	Upper limb tremor is most commonly psychogenic.
	Variable tremor frequency is consistent with a psychogenic cause.
	If patient is asked to tap with one hand and the other hand's tremor entrains with the tapping, suspect a psychogenic cause.



	Diagnosis is made based on the above in conjunction with failure to find an organic disease process












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  


















     











                    
                
            

        
            
                
                
                
                    
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















    
    
        
    


    




    








    
        
    
    





    
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    







    
    
    
    
        
            
            
                

            
        
    
    
    
        
            
                
            

        

    

    
        








	



	
		
	
	
	



	Key Learning Points


    

    
        	Learn the various categories and causes of involuntary movements




        
    

    














    
    
    
        
    
    
    


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    



    
    
        
    




    
    
        
    













  
  

    
        

        
            
                
                    
                
                
                
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    Related to Involuntary Movements
	    
    

  
  
  
 














    	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Cerebellar Exam
	Gait Abnormalities
	Internal Capsule Stroke












                    
                
            

        

    

    

  





















  
  
    
  


  
  
    
  






  
    
	    
	    The Stanford Medicine 25
	    
    

  
  
  
 


	Mastering Newborn Exams 
	The Stanford 25 Exams 
	Aortic Regurgitation Exam
	Ankle Brachial Index
	Ankle and Foot Exam
	Ascites & Venous Patterns
	Bedside Ultrasound
	Breast Exam
	Cardiac Second Sounds
	Carpal Tunnel Exam
	Cerebellar Exam
	Deep Tendon Reflexes
	Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea
	Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Fundoscopic Exam (Ophthalmoscopy)
	Gait Abnormalities
	Hand Exam
	Hip Region Exam
	Internal Capsule Stroke
	Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples
	Knee Exam
	Liver Exam
	Low Back Exam
	Lymph Node Exam
	Neck Vein Exam
	Newborn Jaundice Assessment 
	Pelvic Exam
	Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam
	Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection
	Pupillary Responses
	Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Measurement Techniques
	Rectal Exam
	Spleen Exam
	Tarsal Tunnel Exam
	Thyroid Exam
	Tongue Exam
	Liver Disease, Head to Foot
	Visit the 25
	Shoulder Exam Tutorial
	Parkinson's Disease Exam
	Diastolic Murmurs Exam
	Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam
	Modified Sarnat Exam for Neonatal Encephalopathy
	Neonatal Neurologic Exam
	Rapid Assessment of a Newborn
	Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide 
	Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)
	Understanding Scleroderma








                    
                
            

        

    

    








  









  











    
    
        
















    
    Stanford Medicine 25

        
            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Learn more about Stanford 25.

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    The 25

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Video Gallery

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Annual Symposium

                
            

            
                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Blog

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Recent Posts

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Archive

                
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    Categories

                
            

        

        
            Stanford School of Medicine

            
            
            
                About

                Contact

                Maps & Directions

                Careers

            

            
                Basic Science Departments

                Clinical Science Departments

                Academic Programs

                Vision

            

        

    





            
        


        
             Find People
        

        
             Visit Stanford
        

        
             Search Clinical Trials
        

        
             Give a Gift
        


    

















    
        
            ©2025 Stanford University

            
            
                	
                        Privacy Policy
                    
	
                        Terms of Use
                    
	
                        Accessibility
                    
	
                        Non-Discrimination
                    
	
                        
                            See us on Facebook
                        
                    
	
                        
                            See us on X (Twitter)
                        
                    


            


        

    




    
    



  





  
    Non-Discrimination

    
      Stanford complies with all applicable civil rights laws and does not engage in illegal preferences or discrimination.
      

      Stanford's Non-Discrimination Policy
    

  



  	
      Stanford University
    
	
      Stanford School of Medicine
    
	
      Stanford Health Care
    
	
      Stanford Children's Health
    
	
      Stanford Health Care Tri-Valley
    
	
      Stanford Medicine Partners
    





  

  









  


