Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Approach to the Exam of the Ankle and Foot

The painful conditions of the ankle and foot are very common presentations and most commonly caused by trauma or injury related to sport activities. It is important to be familiar with some basic physical exam maneuvers necessary to confirm the presence of a lesion and to assess its severity.

share

Foot and Ankle Exam

Introduction

The physical exam is of crucial importance for the clinical evaluation of painful conditions of the foot and ankle. These disorders are very common in the outpatient setting, both among professional athletes and recreational exercisers. It is important to be familiar with some basic maneuvers and physical signs necessary to assess the presence and the severity of lesions in the osteo-ligamentous structures of the foot.

Foot and Ankle Anatomy

Important anatomical structures that one must be familiar with while examining the painful ankle and foot, are the following:

Lateral ligaments of the ankle:	Anterior Talo-Fibular Ligament (ATFL): running anteriorly from the lateral malleolus to the talusPosterior Talo

Fibular Ligament (PTFL): running posteriorly from the lateral malleolus to the posterior aspect of the talus

Calcaneo-Fibular ligament (CFL): running from the lateral malleolus to the lateral aspect of the calcaneous, in the middle between the ATFL and the PTFL

Achilles tendon

The talar dome: upper portion of the talus, where the articular cartilage for the tibiotalar joint is located

Metatarsal bones

Interdigital nerves

Anatomy of the ankle. Image credit

Lateral Ankle Sprain

Foot and Ankle Exam

One of the most common causes of foot pain is a lateral ankle sprain. In the mildest presentations, the only structures to be injured are the lateral ankle ligaments, usually in the number or one or two. However, if the damage is more severe, we can observe lesions of all the lateral ligaments plus other structures like the talar dome, the base of 5th metatarsal and the tibio-fibular syndesmosis.

The approach is to check for the integrity of the lateral ligaments first and if all the three ligaments are injured, then we will check the other structures.

Inspection and Palpation

First, have the patient lying down supine with the knee bent on the affected side.

Then, observe the lateral aspect of the foot and ankle for hematomas or bruises.

Then, locate the three lateral ligaments and palpate along their course for crepitus and tenderness.

Lateral ankle inspection and palpation. Image credit

ATFL rupture: Anterior Drawer Sign

This is a provocative test done to check for the integrity of the ATFL. One hand holds the leg down, while the other hand pulls the foot upwards and anteriorly. It is important to compare one side with the other. The presence of tenderness or laxity on one side only indicates an ATFL rupture.

Anterior drawer sign.

CFL rupture: Forced Inversion

This is a provocative test done to check for the integrity of the CFL. Forcefully invert the foot while keeping the leg still with the other hand. Make sure to compare side to side. Again, tenderness or laxity on one side indicate a CFL lesion.

Osteochondral Defect of Talar Dome

To assess for an osteochondral defect we must first locate the talar dome and then palpate to elicit tenderness.

To locate the talar dome we must identify the lateral malleolus and then move anteriorly from it, up to the anterior recess. From here we can move medially and anteriorly along the joint line. The talar dome will be right beneath this point.

Any tenderness elicited by palpating at the level of the anterior joint line is indicative of an osteochondral defect.

5th Metatarsal Base Fracture

To asses for a fracture at the level of the 5th metatarsal base, palpate along the lateral margin of the foot to elicit pain and to feel for any bone defects or irregularities.

Image credit

Tibio-Fibular Syndesmosis Damage

If there is a high grade

ankle sprain with associated damage of the talar dome and/or a 5th

metatarsal fracture, we must rule out an injury of the syndesmosis. To assess

for a syndesmosis damage, we can use two provocative tests: the external

rotation test and the squeeze test.

Credit.

External rotation test

Gently rotate the foot externally while holding the leg still. Any tenderness would be positive for a syndesmosis damage.

External rotation of the foot.

Squeeze test

Squeeze the tibia and the fibula together to elicit tenderness. If present, this indicates a syndesmosis damage.

Squeezing of the tibia and fibula.

Achilles Tendon Pain / Achilles Tendonopathy

Foot and Ankle Exam

Achilles tendinopathy is one of the most common foot pathologies. It can affect both athletes and recreational exercisers, being reported in inactive people as well. Clinically it manifests with foot pain on exertion associated with swellings, nodules and tenderness on palpation of the tendon.

Image credit

Achilles Tendon Palpation

To assess for Achilles tendinopathy, palpate the entire length of the tendon moving downwards. Identify any fusiform swellings, defects or tenderness.

Palpate the entire length of the Achilles.

Also, palpate the sides of the tendon at the level of the heel to check for the presence of a bursa, or for any bony spurs.

Once an abnormality is identified, if it moves upon flexion and extension of the foot, then we can conclude that it is part of the Achilles tendon.

Palpate the heel and confirm that a lesion is part of the Achilles.

Achilles Tendon Rupture

Commonly presenting with acute onset pain at the heel during physical activities that determine a sudden stretching of the tendon, followed by loss of function of the affected lower extremity.

Sometimes it is possible to hear a popping sound when the rupture occurs.

Achilles tendon rupture. Credit.

Squeeze Test or Thompson’s Test

To confirm a suspected Achilles tendon rupture, have the patient lying prone and then squeeze the calf while observing the foot. If there is plantar flexion of the foot, this means that the tendon is intact. Otherwise, a reduced or absent plantar flexion, when compared with the other side, is indicative of a tendon rupture.

Achilles Rupture: other signs

Always with the patient lying prone, hyperdorsiflex both feet at the same time to feel for a buoyant endpoint, indicative of a tendon rupture.

Hyperdorsiflex both feet to feel for a buoyant endpoint.

Also, observe how the foot falls off the bed. A normal foot would be slightly raised and plantar flexed. A foot that is dropping in dorsiflexion would be a sign of Achilles tendon rupture.

Observe how the foot falls off the bed.

Causes of Forefoot Pain

Foot and Ankle Exam

Interdigital (Morton’s) Neuroma

Perineural fibrosis that develops around one of the interdigital nerves, as a consequence of chronic trauma. More common in middle-aged women, it classically presents as a paroxysmal stabbing pain originating from a web space, usually the 2nd or 3rd web space.

Image credit

Mulder's Click

It is a provocative test that consists in compressing the metatarsal heads. If the pain is reproduced and/or a click is felt upon palpation, then the test is considered positive for the presence of a Morton’s neuroma.

2nd Metatarsal Stress Fracture

The most common site for a stress fracture in the

forefoot is the 2nd metatarsal, given that most of the body’s weight

is transferred on this particular bone during every given gait cycle.

To uncover a stress

fracture on physical exam, carefully palpate the 2nd metatarsal in

all its length. Tenderness upon palpation would be a sign that a fracture is

present.

Compress the metatarsal heads. Image credit

Plantar Fasciitis

Foot and Ankle Exam

This represents the most common cause of heel pain.

The pain is usually described as sharp and tends to be more intense with the first steps after long periods without weigh bearing, such as after a night sleep.

There are two ways of confirming the suspicion of plantar fasciitis on physical exam.

Credit.

First, we can elicit pain upon palpation of the origin of the plantar fascia on the plantar-medial calcaneal tubercle.

Also, we can notice tenderness on forced dorsiflexion of the first toe, a maneuver called “the windlass mechanism.”

The windlass mechanism.

Hallux Valgus or Bunion

Foot and Ankle Exam

A common cause of both pain and deformity of the forefoot is the hallux valgus or bunion. It consists of a valgus deformity of the first MTP joint. The etiology is not completely understood even though it seems to be related to wearing tight shoes. Also, it is more commonly diagnosed in women.

Image credit

Physical exam findings

It is usually possible to elicit a characteristic crepitus of the first MTP joint upon palpation.

Also, there is usually evidence of restricted ROM of the first MTP joint.

Palpation of the 1st MTP joint.

Key Learning Points

Learn the ankle and foot exam aspects that include:

inspection

palpation

Related to Foot and Ankle Exam

Hip Region Exam, Approach to

Shoulder Exam

Knee Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Bedside Ultrasound

Mastering Newborn Exams