Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Approach to the Low Back Exam

Low back pain is one of the most common complaints and most commonly caused by musculoskeletal issues.  However it is important to know the exam so that you can confirm less worrisome musculoskeletal issues and look for more serious causes.

share

Introduction

Low Back Exam

Back pain is one of the most common complaints in the outpatient setting. While most causes are related to either the bone contacting the nerves as they exit the verbral canal or strain of the lumber muscles, it's important to be able to confirm this cause with the exam and know when more serious causes such as malignancy, infection (e.g. lumbar osteomyelitis) and inflammatory arthritis, to name a few.

Inspection

Low Back Exam

The first part of the low back exam starts with inspection. First note the contour of the spine. Appreciate the normal posterior curviture of the upper spine (kyphosis) and the normal anterior curviture of the lower spine (lordosis). Lack of lumbar lordosis (i.e. a flat lower spine) is often associated with low back pain.

Click this link to jump to the section on inspection in the video.

Inspection is best done by first observing your patient first standing upright, then again bending forward while still standing (as noted in the image).

Abnormal Findings Upon Inspection in the Low Back Exam

Patient with excess spinal kyphosis of upper spine.

Patient with scoliosis. Note shift relative to red line.

Palpation

Low Back Exam

For the second part, palpation, we generally focus on two areas:

1) The center of the back or the spinal region. Pain here suggests pain from the from the vertebra

2) Just lateral to the center or para-spinal regions. Pain here suggests pain from a muscle strain of the paraspinal muscles.

Click this link to jump to the section on inspection in the video.

Palpation of the spine.

Palpation of paraspinal region.

Provocative Tests

Low Back Exam

The purpose of provovative tests is to elicit pain by specific manuvers, thus a positive test. If positive, these manuvers suggest the nerve is being irritated by a mechanical cause, usually the verebral bones or herniated disc. The irritative nerves form the sciatic nerve, leading to sciatica.

Click this link to jump to the section on provocative tests in the video.

Credit

Straight Leg Test

The most common provocative test is the straight leg test. To conduct this test, have the pateint lay supine and passively elevate the fully extended leg of the affected side to 30-60 degrees. You should need to extend the leg more than 60 degrees. A positive test will elicit pain in the region where the patient was complaining of pain in the back, often radiating down the leg.

You can often elicit pain of the affected side by lifting the leg on the other side if the nerve irritation is severe enough.

Straight Leg Test Variant

Another variant of the straight leg test involves lower the leg to around 30 degrees and flexing the foot and depicted in the image. As in the straight leg test, a positive test involves pain in the lower back, often radiating down the leg.

Tripod Sign

The tripod sign is a provocative test that is conducted while the patient is in the seated position. By elevating one of the legs, a positive sign will elicit pain in the back (again often radiating down the leg) and should be accompanied by the patient's natural tendency to decrease the pain by leaning back and resting both arms on the table to support him or herself, thus the creating a tripod.

Note: this is a good sign to use with patient's suspected of malingering if they complain of pain. Failure to lean back and rest both arms on the table may suggest the pain is note present or not related to irritation of the nerve roots.

Femoral Stretch Test (L2-4)

The straight leg and tripod signs are more sensitive for pain in the L5 & S1 regions. If you suspect pain coming from the L2-4 region (which is less common), you can test for it with the femoral stretch test.

This test is done having your patient lie prone on their stomach. Next, flex the leg at the knee while holding the base of the lef under the knee. Next, simply lift the whole leg up. A positive test suggests pain in the L2-4 region if they complain of pain in the anterior thigh while the leg is lifted up. (See image. Or click this link to jump to this section on the video.)

Neurological Exam

Low Back Exam

For many patients, palpation and provocative tests are enough to confirm a musculoskeletal cause. Conservative treatment is then prescribed. However, if your patient has severe or prolonged pain or if there is any concern from the history about neurological dysfunction a neurological exam should be conducted.

The neurological exam consists of the:

1) Motor Exam

2) Sensory Exam

3) Reflex Exam

Of note, the major nerve roots to examine include L4, L5 and S1 as they are the most commonly affected. Therefore, we will focus on these three roots as well for each neurological exam.

Click this link to jump to the section on the neurological exam in the video.

Motor Exam

In Low Back Pain

L4 Motor Exam

To test L4 strength, have the patient slightly bend the knee and kick out as you keep pressure against the leg. Be sure to compare both sides to see if one side has weakness relative to the other.

L5 Motor Exam

To test L5 strength, hold pressure over the large toes and ask the patient to dorsiflex the big toes and foot towards up. Compare both sides for relative weakness.

S1 Motor Exam

To test S1 strength, hold pressure under both feet and ask the patient to plantarflex the foot down. Compare both sides for relative weakness.

Test for L5 weakness with walking on heels in normal patient. If one foot is unable to lift toes off ground, could suggest L5 weakness on that side.

Test for S1 weakness with walking on toes in normal patient. If one foot is unable to lift heal off ground, could suggest S1 weakness on that side.

Sensory Exam

In Low Back Pain

In the sensory exam, again focusing on L4, L5 & S1, we will look at specific dermatomal regions as noted in the image. If possible, use a monofilament. If not present, you can use your fingers or the tip of a tongue depressor to test for sensation.

Image Credit

L4 Sensory Exam

Focus on the anterior/lateral aspect of the thigh.

L5 Sensory Exam

Focus on the space on the dorsal side between the first and second toe.

S1 Sensory Exam

Focus on the lateral aspect of the foot.

Reflex Exam

In Low Back Pain

The last part of the neurological assessment is the reflex exam. Again we look at L4, L5 & S1. Pay attention to differences on either side.

Click here to visit our page about the deep tendon reflex exam.

Click here to jump to the section on reflexes on the low back pain video.

L4 Reflex Exam

L4 is tested by the patellar reflex.

L5 Reflex Exam

L5 is tested by the medial hamstring reflex.

S1 Reflex Exam

L4 is tested by the achilles reflex.

Consult the Expert on Low Back Pain

Baldeep Singh

Dr. Baldeep Singh is a Clinical Professor at Stanford University and the Vice Chair for Academic Affairs for the Division of Primary Care and Population Health. He is involved in a number of clinical teaching roles at Stanford's School of Medicine and an active member of the Stanford Medicine 25 team with a special expertise in the exam of the lower back and regional hip pain.

Clinical Pearl

When a patient with low back pain has a normal neurological exam, imaging such as MRI or referral to specialists are often not necessary. Conservative treatment such as an ergometric evaluation, attention to exercise modification, physical therapy, and occasional use of NSAIDS and/or acetaminophen are often the focus of treatment.

Differential Diagnoses

Low Back Exam

While by far the most common causes of low back pain are related to the muscle or bone (that is, less worrisome causes from a diagnostic standpoint), it's important to remember the other causes of back pain that may be suggested by the history, physical exam findings or additional tests.

These diagnoses include:

- Malignancy

- Infection (such as an osteomyelitis of the lumbar spine)

- Inflammatory Arthritis

- Back Pain Mimickers:

- Prostatitis

- Pelvic Inflammatory Disease

- Kidney Stones

- Aortic Abdominal Aneurysm

- Gastrointestinal Disease

Key Learning Points

Learn the low back exam aspects that include:

inspection

palpation

provocative tests

neuro exam

awareness of more concerning causes

Related to Low Back Exam

Hip Region Exam, Approach to

Shoulder Exam

Knee Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Bedside Ultrasound

Mastering Newborn Exams