Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Examination of the Hand (The Hand in Diagnosis)

The examination of the hand and nails can lead to a number of diagnoses. Some of these include liver disease (Terry's nails), kidney disease (Lindsay's nails), lung disease (nail clubbing), endocarditis and many others.

share

Introduction to the Hand Exam

Consider beginning all physical examinations by reaching for the patient's right hand with both of yours. Inspect it and then move to the radial pulse. This is a nice way to ease into the examination; you are beginning with the equivalent of a handshake.

Handshake:

Moist and warm hands (think nervousness, thyrotoxicosis, look for tremor, eye signs).

Inability to let go your of hand (think myotonia, not to be confused with the grasp reflex in frontal lobe disease. Look for other signs of myotonic dystrophy: hatchet face, cataracts, baldness, myopathic facies).

Nails

Terry's Nails

Lindsay's Nails (Half-and-half Nails)

Beau's Lines

Muehrcke's Lines (Leukonychia striata)

Mees' Lines

Acral Lentiginous Melanoma

Splinter Hemorrhages

Nail Pitting

Quitter's Nail

Paronychia

Clubbing

Mechanical Dysfunction of the Hand

Pope's Hand (Hand of Benediction)

Ape Hand

Claw Hand

Boutonniere Deformity & Swan Neck Deformity

Misc. Hand Findings

Herpetic Whitlow

Bouchard's and Heberden's Nodes

"Fingerization" of the Thumb

Tripe Hand

Down's Syndrome (Simian Crease)

Janeway Lesions vs. Osler Nodes

Nails

Terry's Nails

Proximal paleness extending halfway up the nail, often eliminating the lunula. Darker distal band. Seen in states of stress (e.g. advanced age, liver disease/cirrhosis, CHF, DM2). (Image Credit)

top

Lindsay's Nails (Half-and-half Nails)

Distal brown transverse band seen in kidney disease. Caused by increased pigment deposition.

top

Beau's Lines

Transverse depressed ridges seen in severe infection, MI, hypotension/shock, hypocalcemia, post-surgical, malnutrition and with certain chemotherapy.

top

Muehrcke's Lines (Leukonychia striata)

Narrow while transverse lines (Not depressed, compared to Beau's lines). Usually 2 or more lines on one nail. Seen in states of decreased protein synthesis or increase protein loss such as with hypoalbunemia (usually less than < 2.2 g/dL), certain chemotherapy and nephrotic syndrome. (Image Credit)

top

Mees' Lines

Transverse while lines (usually one per nail, no depressions) that often can will disappear if pressure is placed over the line. It is strongly associated with arsenic poisoning, thallium poisoning and to a lesser extent other heavy metal poisoning. (Image Credit)

top

Acral Lentiginous Melanoma (involving nail)

While acral lentinginous melenoma is often seen anywhere on the palms, soles, and even in the mouth, when it occurs within the nail, a clue that this is melanoma is involvement of the periungal regions as seen in this picture.

top

Splinter Hemorrhages

Nonspecific finding associated with trauma most commonly but also seen in subacute bacterial endocarditis and scleroderma. (Image Credit)

top

Nail Pitting

Non-specific sign for psoriasis (additional signs include onycholysis, thickening, and 'oilspot' lesions which are yellow patches on the nail). (Image Credit)

top

Quitter's Nail

Nicotine stained distally, but not proximally with clear line of demarcation. See also our article in Chest and NEJM clinical image. May also appear when pt switches to "lower tar" tobacco.

Finger nails grow at a rate of about 0.8-1.0 mm per week. Using this, you can approximate when the clinical scenario causing the nail finding occurred. For example, approximating when someone has stopped smoking who has quitter's nails.

top

Paronychia

Inflammation of the nail folds - red, swollen, often tender. Frequent immersion in water a risk factor for chronic paronychia. (Image Credit)

top

Clubbing

Angle between nail plate and proximal nail fold greater than 180 degrees.

Important causes of clubbing in the adult:

Lungs	Lung Cancer (clubbing is in general an ominous sign for this, and remember "beware of the yellow clubbed digit". (Yellow from nicotine, and clubbed from cancer).

Pus in the lung (bronchiectasis as in CF, but also lung abscess and empyema)

Pulmonary Fibrosis

COPD IS NOT A CAUSE OF CLUBBING (if you seen clubbing in a COPD patient, think lung cancer)

Heart	R to L shunts

Endocarditis

Pericarditis

There are other causes of clubbing, outside the heart and lungs, but these are the important ones.

If a patient has painful wrists, painful ankles and comes to see you and you miss that they also have clubbing, you will go down the wrong path looking for RA etc, when what they have is Hypertrophic Pulmonary Osteoarthropathy. The causes of HPOA are the same as those of clubbing.

Pseudoclubbing: distinguished from clubbing by the preservation of the nail-fold angle and bony erosion of the terminal phalanges on radiography. Pseudoclubbing is also more likely to be asymmetric.

top

Mechanical Dysfunction of the Hand

Pope's Hand (Hand of Benediction)

The pope's hand is seen with median nerve dysfunction when asking the patient to make a fist due to inability to flex 1st & 2nd fingers at PIP. The median nerve controls the 1st & 2nd lumbricals, three thenar muscles (abductor pollicis brevis, flexor pollicis brevis, and via a distal branch the opponens pollicis).Additionally theremay be thenar atrophy. (Image Credit)

Ask patient to use both hands to make and "Okay" sign by forming a circle with thumb and index finger. Median nerve palsy may make one hand produce a pinched circle (right hand in image). (Image Credit)

top

Ape Hand

Distal median nerve dysfunction: Inability to oppose thumb from distal median nerve dysfunction.

Claw Hand

The image below is a simulated claw hand. Note that due to ulnar damage, the 3rd & 4th lumbricals are unable to extend the PIP & DIP joints at the 4th & 5th digits.

The ulnar nerve controls the 3rd & 4th lumbricals, the three hypothenar muscles, the dorsal & palmar interossei, the palmaris brevis and the adductor pollicis. Ulnar nerve damage may also cause hypothenar atrophy.

top

Froment's Sign

Ask patient to hold a piece of paper between thumb and index finger. If the examiner can pull paper away (a positive Froment's sign), it suggests that an ulnar palsy has weakened the thumbs strength of opposition.

Radial nerve damage

No intrinsic muscles but important wrist extensors. Radial nerve damage commonly causes wrist drop.

Boutonniere Deformity & Swan Neck Deformity

Flexion of PIP and extension of DIP, seen in chronic rheumatoid arthritis.

Swan neck deformity: extension of the PIP, flexion of DIP, seen in chronic rheumatoid arthritis. (Image Credit)

top

Misc. Hand Findings

Herpetic Whitlow

Occupational hazard for respiratory therapists and house staff who work around oral secretions. (Image Credit)

top

Bouchard's and Heberden's Nodes

Bouchard nodes (found at the PIP) and Heberden's nodes (found at DIP) are bony outgrowths seen in osteoarthritis (DJD) of the hand. These outgrowths are formed by calcific spurs within the respective articular joint.

top

"Fingerization" of the Thumb--Holt-Ohram Syndrome

Holt-Ohram syndrome - absent radius, single atrium, autosomal dominant. (Image Credit)

top

Hypermobility of hand joints

Ehlers Danlos, many types. Syndrome may include skin hyperextensible, fragile, "cigarette paper burn" scars, spontaneous rupture of eye, arteries, intestine, hip dislocations, Marfanoid habitus, kyphoscoliosis, prominent hernia, mitral valve prolapse, coronary dissection.

Short extremities and polydactyly

Ellis Van Creveld Syndrom - dwarfism, short extremities and polydactyly, dysplastic teeth and nails, multiple frenula binding the upper lip to the alveolar ridge, ASD or a single atrium.

Arachnodactyly (Achromachia)

Long "spider-like" digits, thumb can often extend beyond palm. Characteristic of Marfan's Syndrome - tall stature, thoracic deformity, joint laxity, ectopia lentis and myopia, aortic dilation and dissection, mitral valve prolapse, autosomal dominant, spontaneous pneumothorax, chordae tendineae rupture.

Tripe Hand

Thickened, velvety texture of hand. Often sign of visceral malignancy. See also NEMJ "Velvet Palms" in Images in Clinical Medicine. (Image Credit)

top

Down's syndrome

Single palmar crease (Simian crease). The fifth digit is abnormally short (only reaches the second crease of the 4th digit). Remember to look for endocardial cushion defects (ASD, VSD and mitral/triscuspid abnormalities).

top

Janeway Lesions vs. Osler Nodes

Both found in bacterial endocarditis.

Osler Nodes:

Painful, palpable red lesions usually on fingers/toes. They are caused by immune complexes. (Image Credit)

Janeway Lesions

Non-painful, macular lesions, usually on palms/soles. They are caused by septic emboli, more common in Staph aureus endocarditis. (Image Credit)

(See Splinter Hemorrhages and Roth Spots)

top

Key Learning Points

Learn nail pathology

Learn mechanical dysfunction of the hand

Review misc. hand findings

Related to The Hand in Diagnosis

Fundoscopic Exam

The Tongue in Diagnosis

Thyroid Exam

Mastering Newborn Exams