Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Knee Exam

Knee complaints are common and the knee exam is the most important way to address these complaints by finding the cause of knee pain and figuring out what treatment is needed.

share

Introduction to the Knee Exam

Careful examination of the knee can provide valuable information and help the physician determine when imaging studies may or may not be helpful.

Knee Exam Technique

Inspection: Observe both knees together. Note any asymmetry of the joint or quadriceps muscles.

Ask patient to lie supine. Whenever possible, ensure patient can lie comfortably with head back, legs straight, and toes up

Assess temperature by placing back of hand to shin then ipsilateral knee, repeated for both legs.	Commonly, the knee will feel cooler than the shin.

If knee feels warmer than shin, suspect inflammation.

Try the "crossover test" with one hand on one knee and one on the other knee. Decide if there's a temperature difference. Next, cross the hands to test the opposite knee. If there's a temperature difference, it will be exagerated by this maneuver.

Assess for fluid	Method 1: Gently press just medial of the patella, then move the hand in an ascending motion. Then press firmly on the lateral aspect of the knee.	Commonly, no fluid will be appreciated.

A medial aspect that 'bulges' out after lateral pressure (positive "bulge sign") is consistent with a moderate amount of fluid.

A medial aspect that does not bulge but tensely reflects lateral pressure is consistent with a large amount of fluid.

Method 2: Assess for fluid by placing one hand superior to the patella and with slight downward pressure milk the suprapatellar pouch which emptys into the knee joint. Next use the other hand to push to push on the patella. If there is an effusion, the patellar will bounce off the underlying bone (patella tap test).	A palpated or audible tap indicates a "ballotable" knee and is consistent with at least a moderate amount of fluid.

Assess for tendon pathology by firmly palpating the superior pole of the patella and then the inferior to assess patellar femoral syndrome.	Tenderness at the superior insertion is consistent with quadriceps tendon pathology.

Tenderness at the inferior insertion is consistent with patellar tendonitis, "Jumpers knee."	In the patient with direct patellar trauma & isolated patellar tenderness, an x-ray is indicated to evaluate for fracture.

Assess for cartilage pathology	Apley's grind test (patellar cartilage tear): By placing palm on patella and applying firm pressure while manipulating the patella in the sagittal plane. Crepitus is significant only when accompanied by tenderness, in which case it is consistent with patellar cartilage pathology.

McMurray test (meniscus cartilage tear):	Lateral meniscus tear: With patient supine, fully flex the knee, place forefingers on lateral side of joint line, then with applying valgus stress and internal rotation of leg, extend the knee looking for both pop/click and pain

Medial meniscus tear: With patient supine, fully flex the knee, place forefingers on medial side of joint line, then with applying varus stress and external rotation of leg, extend the knee looking for both pop/click and pain

Assess for laxity	While supine, ask patent to flex knee and set foot on examination table. Sit on the foot to immobilize it and grasp the head of the tibia with both hands and pull anteriorly.	Movement greater than 1cm (positive anterior drawer sign) is consistent with an anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tear.

Do not attempt to elicit an anterior drawer sign with legs hanging; the extra degree of freedom will confound any findings.

Lachman test: flex the knee only 20-30 degrees (rather than 90 degrees in anterior drawer sign), then attempt to pull tibia anterior relative to the femur. If positive, a deficient ACL will demonstrate increase movement forward. This test is thought to be more sensitive than the anterior drawer sign.

Attempt to hyperextend knee by placing one hand superior to the patella and the other posterior to the heel. More than 2-3cm (i.e. able to place one or two fingers beneath the heel when leg is extended and flat) is abnormal.

With both hands, flex and extend the knee. Repeat while introducing medial and lateral rotation. Determine if any "locking" or "catching" is present.

With leg straight, apply valgus stress and varus stress to text deviation greater than a few centimeters.

Consult the Expert

Mark Genovese

Dr. Mark Genovese is certified in rheumatology and is actively involved in house staff training at Stanford University. He is involved in research including clinical trials and interventions in rheumatic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, & osteoarthritis.

Clinical Pearl

If a careful exam does not elicit significant pain or laxity, imaging studies are extremely unlikely to provide further useful information.

Iliotibial Band Syndrome

Iliotibial band syndrome presents as lateral knee pain from a tight iliotibial band that crosses over the lateral femoral epicondyle. It is most commonly seen in runners and aggravated during running. The diagnosis can be made by noting pain in the lateral aspect of the knee, especially during running. There are also two tests, reviewed below that will help you diagnose and confirm iliotibial band syndrome.

Treatment includes rest, pain medications and often can be corrected by addressing strength deficits such as abduction weaknesses which can be treated with physical therapy.

Click here to watch a video on the exam for iliotibial band syndrome.

Adapted from Image Credit

Noble Test

In the noble test is done placing the knee with some flexion while patient is supine. Next place the thumb over the iliotibial band before its insertion to the lateral femoral condyle (as noted in image). While placing pressure with your thumb, attempt to extend the leg, looking for pain under your thumb.

Noble test: With leg slightly flexed, place pressure over iliotibial band with thumb.

Noble test: Next, extend leg while holding pressure over the iliotibial band, looking for pain in that region.

Ober Test

In the Ober test you are looking for a tight iliotibial band. To conduct the Ober test, place your patient on his or her lateral side with the painful side facing up. Next, place your hand under the lower part of leg and bring the whole leg posterior (as in image below). Next, while stablizing the hip, attempt to bring the leg down to level of the other leg. Inability to bring the leg down to the level of the lower leg suggests a tight iliotibial band and a positive Ober's test. A positive Ober's test in a patient with lateral knee pain is highly suggestive of iliotibial band syndrome.

Ober test: First bringing leg while supported posterior.

Ober test: Next bring higher leg down to level of lower leg. If unable to lower leg, then test is positive for a tight iliotibial band.

Key Learning Points

Learn the checklist and technique of the knee exam (see video)

Related to Knee Exam

Low Back Exam, Approach to

Hip Region Exam, Approach to

Shoulder Exam

Mastering Newborn Exams