Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Neck Vein Examination & Wave Forms

The jugular venous exam is an important aspect of assessing a patient's volume status, especially in patients with heart failure, liver failure and kidney failure. Both elevation of the neck veins and the variations of the neck vein waveforms share valuable information about a patient's diagnosis.

share

How to Measure the Jugular Venous Pressure (JVP)

Get the patient to relax, raise the bed so you are not straining.

Take the pillow away; the waveforms are often better seen with the head lying directly against the examining table/bed.

Position the neck until you have the best view.

If you make sure the room is well lit, there is no need for shining a flashlight, penlight or other direct light.

Make your first goal just to see a pulsation, and then decide if it is arterial or venous by applying the following criteria to identify venous waves:	Venous wave is bifid, flicking like a snake's tongue.

It rises when you lower the head of the bed and sinks when you raise the head of the bed.

It changes with respiration, sinking into the chest with inspiration.

It is not palpable.	It is fine to use the external jugular vein, as long as you can see clear wave forms in it.

Commonly, a prominent pulsation is mistaken for that of the carotid artery rather than of the JVP. To differentiate, press on the RUQ while watching the neck. The JVP should rise in all individuals with this maneuver; whereas a carotid pulsation should not change.

The JVP can be assessed on either the right or left. On occasion (musculoskeletal anatomy, venous clots) the pulsations can only be visualized on one side. If you cannot clearly define the JVP on the right internal jugular, examine the left.

If you cannot determine the JVP, report the exam as "JVP not visualized" rather than "no JVD" (which implies that the JVP was visualized and is not elevated).

Once you have determined that you are seeing the venous waves then measure the jugular venous pressure:

Identify JVP at the highest point of pulsation

Extend card or ruler horizontally from highest pulsation point , cross with ruler placed on the sternal angle (Angle of Louis), (let's say it was 8cm).

Add 5 cm (to get to the center of the atrium) and then report the JVP as "the jugular venous pressure was 13 cm of water" (not mercury).

Understanding the Jugular Venous Waveform

Normal Jugular Venous Waveforms

There are two positive waves 'a' and 'v', one occurring just before the first heart sound or the carotid impulse, and one just after. When the heart rate is 80 or less, they are fairly easy to time, but if the heart rate is fast, then you may need to auscultate while you observe.

"A" wave: atrial contraction (ABSENT in atrial fibrillation)

"C" wave: ventricular contraction (tricuspid bulges). YOU WON'T SEE THIS

"X" descent: atrial relaxation

"V" wave: atrial venous filling (occurs at same of time of ventricular contraction)

"Y" descent: ventricular filling (tricuspid opens)

Abnormal Jugular Venous Waveforms

Elevated "a" wave

Resistance to right atrial emptying, may occur at or beyond the tricuspid valve. Examples include:	Pulmonary Hypertension

Rheumatic tricuspid stenosis

Right atrial mass or thrombus

Cannon "a" wave

Large positive venous pulse during "a" wave. It occurs when an atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve during AV dissociation. Examples include:	Premature atrial/junctional/ventricular beats

Complete atrio-ventricular (AV) block

Ventricular tachycardia

Absent "a" wave

No atrial contraction, common to atrial fibrillation.

Elevated "v" wave

Tricuspid regurgitation is the most common cause (Lancisi sign).	The ventricle contracts and if the tricuspid valve does not close well, a jet of blood shoots into the right atrium.

Tricuspid regurgitation, if significant, will be accompanied by a pulsatile liver (feel over the lower costal margin).

You will also hear the murmur of tricuspid regurgitation—a pansystolic murmur that increases on inspiration.

Other signs:

Kussmaul's sign: neck veins rise in inspiration rather than fall—often a sign of pericardial tamponade or right heart failure (acute right ventricular myocardial infarction)

Friedrich's sign: exaggerated "x" wave or diastolic collapse of the neck veins from constrictive pericarditis.

Measuring Central Venous Pressure Using a Patient's Arm

Consult the Expert

Dr. Ronald Witteles

Dr. Ronald Witteles is certified in Internal Medicine and Cardiology. He serves as the Stanford Internal Medicine Program Director, Associate Director of the CCU and Co-Director, Stanford Amyloid Center.

Clinical Pearl

The sternal angle (Angle of Louis) is the most popular reference point to use because it remains approximately 5 cm above right atrium regardless of the patient's position. The clavicle can also be used as a reference point, however it will change with position. In the upright position, the clavicle is approximately 10 cm above the right atrium.

Key Learning Points

Learn best technique to measure the jugular venous pressure

Examine jugular venous wave forms for abnormalities

Related to Neck Vein Examination & Wave Forms

Precordial Movements

Cardiac Second Sounds

BP & Pulsus Paradoxus

Mastering Newborn Exams