Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Approach to the Nevi (Mole) Exam

All nevi (or moles) should be taken seriously as they may be normal or represent a cancer. Here we review the characteristics of any mole that should increase suspicion of cancer.

share

Show video transcript

Today we're going to talk about how to approach a patient with multiple nevi or moles and we have a patient here for you today who we’ll examine together.

Hi, I'm Jennifer Chen, nice to meet you. Okay, are you ready for us to take a look at you today?

I'm ready.

Great.

So when I look at a patient who we’re doing a full-body skin exam on I always start by trying to get a general feel for how many moles there are and how they're distributed so normally what I would do is go in a systematic manner from the head down to the toes so I start with the scalp then I move on to the face making sure to look at the medial canthi you want to look at the ears including the conchal bowls, then I move down to the arms making sure to remove any jewelry that might be obscuring my view of what's going on on the skin.

Make sure also that when you look at the hands and feet you're also looking at the web spaces between the fingers and toes. So now we're going to take a look at a few different findings here.  So we can start right up here on the forehead. When you examine the skin you always want to get your fingers involved. You want to be able to tell is it a papule? Something you can feel?  Or is it a macule, something that you can't feel when you run your fingers over it? Right here you can see that there's a gritty papule that can't really be seen so easily with the naked eye but you can feel it when you run your finger over it.  That is an actinic keratosis a precancerous growth that we do like to treat to prevent skin cancer and that's the classic presentation where we'll see it or we'll feel it before we can see it.

You can move on to the back here. So taking a look here you can see multiple non blanchable bright red vascular papules.  This is called a cherry angioma.  They're extremely common and they run in families. So here you see pink and brown symmetric bin papule with some central hairs.  It's symmetric, it's one color, it's smaller than six millimeters.  This is a normal mole.

Let's move on to your arms. So over here you have stuck on appearing brown thin flat-topped plaque.  This is a separate keratosis that looks like it could be a sticker just stuck right on the skin. That characteristic stuck on appearance can help you to distinguish a separate keratosis from a mole. These are common in everyone as they age and they are nothing to worry about.

The ABCDES is a mnemonic to help you remember what features you're looking for that could indicate melanoma.  A stands for asymmetry. B stands for border irregularity like notched or scalloped borders.  C stands for multiple colors.  There may be shades of tan brown or black or sometimes red white or blue. D stands for diameter. Melanomas are usually greater than six millimeters, about the size of a pencil eraser, but they can be smaller. E stands for evolution or change and this is the most important sign. If something is changing you want to take it seriously.

The ugly duckling sign refers to looking for a mole that looks different from all the rest. This can usually be a very helpful hint towards fighting a melanoma. In summary it's especially important when you're looking for melanoma to always do a thorough skin exam.

Remember: be systematic, don't miss those hidden areas like the conchal bowls the medial canthi, the inner gluteal cleft and perianal region and the finger and toe web spaces.  Make sure you take a thorough history and physical and take seriously anything that the patient thinks is new or changing. Thank you for your time.  Please refer to the Stanford 25 website for more information.

The preceding program is copyrighted by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford junior University. Please visit us at med.stanford.edu.

Introduction to the Nevi (Mole) Exam

Before you can make a diagnosis of any skin lesion, it's important to be able to accurately describe the skin lesion. The purpose of this page is to cover the fundamental knowledge you will need to do this.

Outline:

General Approach to the Nevi Exam

Normal Findings

Consult the Expert

Abnormal Findings

Clinical Corner

General Approach to Nevi (Mole) Exam

If screening for melanoma:

Be systematic (from head to toes)

If you're really doing a full body exam, don't miss these areas:	Conchal bowls (inside the ears)

Medial cathi (see figure)

Inner gluteal cleft

Parianal region

Between fingers and toes

back to top

Normal Findings with Moles

While looking for abnormal lesions, you may stumble upon these normal ones.

Normal mole

Symmetric, small than 6 mm, one color. These are the hallmarks of a normal mole. See below for signs of abnormal lesions.

Seborrheic keratosis

These are common, benign skin lesions that occur more frequently with age. The are often described as "stuck-on" lesions, as if a ball small ball of gum was thrown again a wall and stuck to it. There is nothing needed to do for these lesions other than reassure your patient. (Note: patients with many of these, such as greater than 50, often all over torso can be a sign of a hidden malignancy, usually with the gastrointestinal tract. This is referred to as the sign of Leser-Trelat.)

Cherry hemangioma

A normal and very common lesion, these are caused by the proliferation of small blood vessels in the skin. There is no need for and medical intervention for these.

back to top

back to top

Abnormal Findings - ABCDE's of Melanoma

These signs should lead you to monitor skin lesions more closely or have them biopsied to diagnose melanoma.

Asymmetry

If you were to cut a line down the middle of this lesion, both halves will NOT look like a mirror image of each other.

Border (irregular)

back to top

Color

Multiple colors in one lesion can suggest underlying melanoma.

Diameter

Usually greater than 6mm, which is about the size of a pencil eraser. However, remember small moles do not rule out melanoma.

Evolving

This is the most important sign! If a lesion is changing (e.g. growing, new colors or change in border), you should keep a high suspicion for melanoma.

back to top

The Ugly Duckling Sign

This refers to one mole among many that sticks out and looks different ("the ugly duck") and should raise suspicion for melanoma.

back to top

Consult the Expert

Jennifer Chen

Dr. Chen is a Clinical Assistant Professor and Dermatologist at Stanford University Hospital and Clinics.

Clinical Pearl

When you examin the skin, always get your fingers involved to palpate lesions that are harder to see. A classic example of this is the skin cancer precursor called an actinic keratosis (image below). In this lesion, you often feel it before it becomes easier to see.

Key Learning Points

Learn the general approach to the nevi (mole) exam

Learn the signs of an abnormal lesion

Related to Dermatology Exam

Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea

The General Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language

Mastering Newborn Exams