Learn how we are healing patients through science & compassion

Back

Research

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Institutes

Research centers

See full directory

Research Resources

Research administration

Academic profiles

Clinical trials

Funding opportunities

See all

Professional Training

Postdoctoral scholars

Clinical research fellows

Research News

Neuroscientist Michelle Monje awarded MacArthur 'genius grant'

Explore Research

Learn how we are fueling innovation

Back

Education

MD program

PA Programs

PhD programs

Masters programs

Continuing Medical Education

Postdoctoral scholars

Residencies & fellowships

High School & Undergraduate Programs

See all

Education Resources

Academic profiles

School Administration

Basic science departments

Clinical science departments

Alumni services

Faculty resources

Diversity programs

Lane Library

Student resources

Education News

Explore Education

Learn how we empower tomorrow's leaders

Back

Give

Support teaching, research, and patient care.

Ways to give

Why giving matters

Make a gift online

Support Children's Health

Support Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford and child and maternal health

Ways to give

How your gift helps

Make an online gift

Back

About

About us

News

Contacts

Maps & directions

Leadership

Vision

Diversity

Global health

Community engagement

Events

How you can help

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health

Back

Site Search

The 25

The 25

Mastering Newborn Exams

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Understanding Scleroderma

More

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Cerebellar Exam

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology: Learning the Language

Dermatology: Nevi (mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lymph Node Exam

Neck Veins & Wave Forms

Newborn Jaundice

Parkinson's Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pupillary Responses

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

Tongue Exam

Thyroid Exam

Blog

Blog

ArchiveArchive

20232023

Promoting Inclusive Care at the Patient Bedside

Janet Tillman's Life as SP and GTA

The Significance of Small Gestures at the Patient Bedside

Balancing Technology and Human Connection in Patient Care

How the ‘Privilege of Physicianhood’ Inspires Best-Selling Author Abraham Verghese

Honoring Breast Cancer Awareness Month Through Physical Exam Knowledge

20222022

Through a Patient’s Eyes: Physicians Reflect on Personal Illness

Physical Exams and Clinical Observations Related to Cardiovascular Health

Combat Physician Burnout with the Joy of Bedside Medicine

Physical Exam Techniques to Support and Promote Women’s Health

How Physicians Go Above and Beyond to Promote Patient Healing

How to Address Monumental Patient Conversations

The Importance of Cultural Competence in Bedside Medicine

How Physicians Can Help Promote Early Detection of Prostate Cancer

7th Time's a Charm: The 2022 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Communication Strategies to Help Physicians Lead Meaningful Patient Conversations

Bringing Tidings of Comfort and Joy to the Patient Bedside

20212021

Medscape Article Highlights Need for Physical Exam Training & Assessment

The Resurgence of Bedside Teaching During the Pandemic

Teaching Empathy in Medical Education

The Presence 5 for Racial Justice: Promoting Anti-Racism in Clinical Interactions

Dr. Verghese’s Rules for the Bedside Exam

Bringing Human Connection to the Forefront of Medicine in a Technological Era

20202020

Five Practices to Strengthen the Physician-Patient Relationship

Telehealth Tips to Preserve Key Aspects of Patient Care

20192019

How AI Can Improve the EHR and Bedside Medicine

Bedside Teaching is a Powerful Learning Tool in the ICU

Thoughtful Implementation of Machine Learning Can Help Physicians Improve Patient Care

Register Now for the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Cultivating The “Golden Minute” at the Bedside

Four Physicians Describe the Synergy Between Technology and Bedside Medicine

Artificial Intelligence and the Gift of Physician Time

Compassion: A Powerful Tool for Improving Patient Outcomes

The Physical Exam Remains an Effective Tool for Physicians

The Art and Science of Patient Care

Learning from the Bedside at the 5th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

Physicians Can Protect the Human Connection in Medicine

A Diagnosis of Nelson's Syndrome and Why You Won't See it Anymore

Humanizing the EHR

20182018

What Stands in the Way of Bedside Teaching?

An Emphasis on the Bedside May Prevent Physician Burnout

The Spine Sign

Artificial Intelligence as a Partner in Patient Care

Physical Exam Can Sort Out - And Treat - Common Type of Vertigo

Bedside Medicine Training Benefits New and Established Physicians

Benefits of Bringing Doctors Back to the Bedside

UMKC Case Highlights the Importance of Thorough Physical Exam

Register Now for the 4th Annual Bedside Teaching Symposium

Using Art to Teach the Human Side of Medicine

Journal Dedicates Entire Issue to “Enduring Value” of Bedside Medicine

The Basics vs. Technology Debate: When They Work Together Everyone Wins

Abraham Verghese Shares Story of the EHR’s Negative Consequences With Broader Audience

The 4th Annual Stanford 25 Bedside Teaching Symposium

The Miracle of a Patient’s Recovery

Compassion, Patience and Bedside Manner Improve Patient Satisfaction

Technology Doesn’t Have to Be the Antithesis of Humanity

AI to Complement – Not Compete With –Physicians’ Diagnostic Skills

The Tradition of Daily Bedside Clinical Care

How Technology May Lead to Greater Human Connection at the Bedside

Finding Joy in Physical Exam Skills

As Prices Drop, Point-of-Care Ultrasound May Spark Evolution of Physical Exam

Empathy and the Physical Exam Remain Essential Components of Medicine

Teaching the “Intangibles” of Medicine

AI is Doing More to Help Keep Doctors at the Bedside

Using Riddles as Medical Teaching Tools

Medical Students Recognize Importance of Bedside Manner

20172017

Announcing the 2017 Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

Gingival Hyperplasia in Acute Leukemia

Miliaria (Heat Rash) Types & Symptoms

Dr. Abraham Verghese Interviews Dr. Jerome Kassirer on New Book

Signs of Scleroderma

can-improv-help-doctors

conversation-about-bedside-medicine-gains-momentum

20162016

What is amyopathic dermatomyositis?

What is this Kussmaul’s sign?

Abraham Verghese Asks: Why Are We Doing This Teaching?

Referred Pain Physical Exam

Will the Healing Touch Go Out the Door With the Stethoscope?

Muscle Spasticity vs Rigidity

What is a roth spot?

Stanford 25 Skills Symposium 2016 Announced!

Every Patient Has a Story Worth Hearing

What is the Howell-Jolly body?

What will bedside manner look like for new data-driven physicians?

What is Plummer-Vinson syndrome?

What is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule?

What is rhinophyma?

What is the ugly duckling sign?

Diagnose this skin lesion with newest Stanford 25 video and topic.

What is the exam of calciphylaxis?

Medical Errors and Adverse Events from a Missed or Inadequate Physical Exam

What is skin coining (Gua sha)?

20152015

Announcing the Stanford 25 Skills Symposium

The Jugular Venous Pulse – Circa 1957

Guttate psoriasis Exam and Overview

Thyroid Nodule Overview - The Thyroid Exam

What Is The Specific Cause of This Patient’s Clubbing?

Frank's Sign (Diagonal Earlobe Crease) |

The Saddle Nose - Overview

COMING OUT OF THE COLD

Approach to Spinal Disease by Dr. Rick Hodes

20132013

Patient has this new skin finding, what should you worry about?

Stanford 25: Approach to Tremor

Congratulations to our ACP Winners!

Happy Halloween! So this is the scariest picture we’ve got! What is it?

An interesting illustration of the physical exam

If you put your stethoscope over this, what will you hear?

A patient presents with foot pain and these chronic findings?

Stanford ENT Free Oral Screening November 2nd

Your patient gets this rash, what’s the diagnosis?

This patient presents with chest pain. What’s the diagnosis?

Website Reaches Half a Million Visitors!

A patient asks you… what is this?

Can you diagnose the cause of the patient’s lymphedema?

Can you guess the cause of the patient’s bleed?

The History of Pulsus Paradoxus

Understanding Pulsus Paradoxus

Remember this finding???

Learn how doctor’s should perform a bedside swallow evaluation!

Using Google Glass to Examine the Hand with Dr. Verghese

Welcome New Stanford Interns!!!!

Teaching the teachers… Our methods.

What is the Marcus Gunn Pupil?

Abdominal Wall Pain

Do you know what this is???

This-Week’s-Stanford-25-Session

Examination of the Trachea

Split Fixed Second Heart Sound & Loud P2

The History of the Reflex Hammer

Dr. Andrew Elder Visiting Stanford

Abraham-Verghese’s-TED-Talk:-Over-one-million-views!

11 Facts About Sir William Osler

Know your tremor?

Measuring Central Venous Pressure with the Arm

20242024

Healing: A Journey, Not a Destination

Confusion & Unsteady Gait: This Physical Exam Tells You Why

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Maja Artandi, MD

Stanford 25 Perspectives: Featuring Michelle Chiu, MD

Five Tips to Enhance Patient Communication at the Bedside

9 Tips to Make Each Patient Encounter More Inclusive

Tips and Considerations for Medical Draping to Promote Patient Comfort

Hands-On Healing:The Evidence Behind Therapeutic Touch

Physical Exam Resources for Parkinson's Disease

CategoriesCategories

Cardiology

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Extremities

Gastroenterology/Hepatology

Gynecology/Women's Health

Hematology/oncology

History

Neurology

News

Ophthalmology

Perspective

Pulmonary

Rheumatology

Technology

Video Gallery

The Stanford 25 Exams

The Stanford 25 Exams

Newborn Cardiac Examination

About

About

Symposium

Resident Education: Internist Physical Exams

TedMed

Blog Overview

Contact

Approach to the Exam for Parkinson's Disease

Parkinson’s Disease is one of the most commonly diagnosed motor disorders. It is important to be familiar with the physical exam so that you can confirm the diagnosis and monitor how the treatment is benefiting the patient over time.

share

Introduction

Parkinson’s Disease Exam

The physical exam in Parkinson’s disease (PD) is essential both for making a diagnosis and following the patient over time. It consists of a series of tests and maneuvers that help us identify and evaluate the four main characteristics of the disease:

-       Bradykinesia

-       Rigidity

-       Tremor

-       Gait & Balance abnormalities

In order to make a diagnosis, we must observe bradykinesia plus either one of the other motor abnormalities.  Once a diagnosis is made and the patient is started on treatment, it is important to check these four features at every follow up visit, so that we can gauge the treatment based on how the exam has changed over time.

Some of the clinical features of PD. Image credit

Inspection

Parkinson’s Disease Exam

Before beginning the interactive part of the physical exam, it is very important to focus on observing the patients while they are giving the history, to notice any motor disturbances present at rest.

In particular we should focus on:

-       Spontaneous movements, generally reduced in PD

-       Hands gestures while talking, usually reduced or absent

-       Eyeblink, whose spontaneous rate is reduced

-       Resting tremor, usually affecting one hand only

-       Fidgeting and crossing/uncrossing of the legs, that may indicate dyskinesia, a complication of chronic Levodopa therapy

It is important to remember that the inspection starts as soon as the patient walks in to the room.

Click this link to watch an example of spontaneous resting tremor on the video.

Bradykinesia

Parkinson’s Disease Exam

Bradykinesia is defined as a generalized slowness of movement, with patients struggling in particular with starting a movement. It is seen in almost every patient with Parkinson’s disease, making its presence essential for diagnosis. It is also one of the most debilitating symptoms of PD.

Rapid Alternating Movements

To test for the presence of bradykinesia we will have the patient perform rapid alternating movements. It is important to remember that these movements must be performed as fast as possible and as big as possible, meaning with the amplest range possible. All these tests are positive for bradykinesia if the range of motion and/or the speed reduce over time. For this reason, it is crucial to ask the patient to do at least ten repetitions for each movement.

Also, in both the upper and lower extremities, the movements more affected by bradykinesia are the finest ones, such as the movements of the toes and fingers.

Finger tapping

In finger tapping the patient is instructed to tap the index finger on the thumb as fast possible and as big as possible. This means that the patient should try to separate the two fingers as much as possible before tapping them. Make sure to test both the right and the left side.

Click this link to watch an example for the “finger tapping test ” on the video.

Finger tapping.

Fist Open Close

If the patient has arthritis of the hand joints, the finger tapping is not a very sensitive test. In this case, we can use other tests such as the fist open close. To perform this test, instruct the patient to open and close the fist as fast as possible and by spreading the fingers as much as possible.

Click this link to watch an example for the “fist open close test” on the video.

Rapid opening and closing of the fist.

Pronation/Supination of the Hand

This represents another alternative to the finger tapping test. The patient is instructed to flex the shoulder forward at 90° and fully extend the forearm. From this position, ask the patient to rapidly alternate pronation and supination of the hand. Again, look for a reduction in the speed and amplitude of movement, no matter how slight this is.

Click this link to watch an example for the “pronation/supination test” on the video.

Rapid pronation/supination of the hand.

Toe Tapping

It is possible to test for bradykinesia in the lower extremities too, where the most sensitive test is toe tapping. In this test the patient sits on a chair with both feet on the ground. The patient is instructed to rapidly tap the floor with the toes while the heel is kept in touch with the ground. The test is positive if the speed and/or amplitude of movement reduce over time.

Click this link to watch an example of the “toe tapping test” on the video.

Fast toe tapping on the ground.

Heel Tapping

To carry on the test, first the patient has to sit on a chair with the feet on the ground. Then, instruct the patient to repetitively and rapidly tap the whole foot on the ground. This maneuver tends to be less sensitive than toe tapping. Again, the test is positive if the speed or amplitude of movement reduces over time.

Click this link to watch an example for the “heel tapping test” on the video.

Fast tapping of the heel on the ground.

Rigidity

Parkinson’s Disease Exam

Rigidity is defined as increased

resistance to passive movement about a joint. It usually starts on one side and

later spreads to the other one. It is similar to spasticity since both

conditions show increased resistance to passive movement. However, rigidity is

not direction dependent, that means there is the same amount of resistance both

in extension and flexion of the affected limb. Also, rigidity is not velocity

dependent, meaning that the tone does not change based on the speed of passive

motion.

Passive Manipulation of Limbs

To test for the presence of rigidity, we need to passively manipulate the limbs of the patient. However, If the disease is in its early stage or the symptoms are well controlled with medications, we may not be able to see rigidity. We will need to use some activation maneuvers, that basically consist in performing repetitive movements with the limb contralateral to the one that is being tested.

Also, there are two types of rigidity:

-       Lead-pipe rigidity: where the tone is uniformly and smoothly increased throughout the entire range of movement

-       Cogwheel rigidity: where a tremor is superimposed on the hypertonia, making the movement irregular due to intermittent increase and reduction of tone

Upper Extremity Testing

For the upper extremity the most sensitive joint where to check for rigidity is the wrist. To uncover rigidity, passively rotate the wrist and feel for a resistance to the movement. It is very important that the arm of the patient is fully relaxed when rotating the wrist. To do this, place your proximal hand under the patient’s forearm, while your distal hand grabs and rotates the wrist of the patient. When rigidity is present, the range of motion will be preserved but you will feel a resistance in performing the movement.

Wrist rotation with activation maneuver.

It is also possible to test for rigidity in the elbow by passively flexing and extending the forearm.

In both cases, we can unmask the rigidity by asking the patient to forcefully and repeatedly tap the other hand on the knee as activation maneuver.

Elbow flexion-extension with activation maneuver.

Lower Extremity Testing

To test for the presence of rigidity in the lower extremity, place your top hand under the patient’s knee to fully support the weight of the leg and make sure the extremity is relaxed. Then, grab and rotate the patient’s foot with your bottom hand to test the ankle joint. After that, always by grabbing the patient’s foot, passively flex and extend the knee.

The activation maneuver in this case is identical to the one used for the upper extremity. The patient will tap his contralateral hand on his other knee.

Again, rigidity is present if a resistance, rather than a limitation to the range movement, is noted.

Passive rotation of the ankle.

Passive flexion-extension of the knee.

Tremor

Parkinson’s Disease Exam

Tremor is defined as an involuntary trembling of a body part. There are three main types of tremor:

-       Resting tremor

-       Action (Kinetic) tremor

-       Postural tremor

All of these types of tremor can be seen in Parkinson’s disease, even though resting tremor is the more frequently observed one and also the most severe when all three tremors are present in PD.

Patients with essential tremor, instead, classically have more severe postural and kinetic tremors as compared to resting tremor.

Resting Tremor

In Parkinson’s disease resting tremor most commonly manifests in the hands as a rotatory movement of the fingers, especially the thumb and index (pill-rolling). Even though we could observe a resting tremor while the patients are giving the history, sometimes they may assume a position that suppresses the tremor. For example, they could sit on their hands or hold them in their lap. The best position to uncover a resting tremor is with the patient sitting on the chair with both hands lying relaxed on the thighs.

Click this link to see an example of resting tremor on the video.

Resting tremor on the left hand.

Postural Tremor

Postural tremor is a type of tremor that emerges when the patient maintains a position against gravity. To test for postural tremor, first have the patient fully extend the elbow and flex the arm forward at 90°. Then, ask the patient to spread the fingers out as much as possible and hold this position for a few minutes. This is necessary since a postural tremor in PD is often evidenced only a few seconds or minutes after the position in assumed.

Click this link to see an example of postural tremor on the video.

Position to test postural tremor.

Kinetic (Action) Tremor

Action or kinetic tremor is a type of tremor that is uncovered only when the patient is carrying out a movement. To test for kinetic tremor we can use the finger to nose test. In performing this test, the patients are instructed to alternatively touch their nose and our finger. In doing so, the patients should stretch their arm completely and should not move too fast. In this way we have more chances of triggering the tremor.

There is a different variant of the finger to nose test, in which the finger of the examiner changes position every time that the patient tries to reach it. This variant of the test is used to test for ataxia, rather than for tremor.

Click here to jump to the section of the video showing how to perform the finger to nose test.

Finger to nose test: the patient reaches for the finger of the examiner.

Finger to nose test: the patient goes back to his nose.

Gait & Balance Abnormalities

Parkinson’s Disease Exam

Patients with Parkinson’s disease can develop an alteration of the postural reflexes that causes instability in gait and balance control. Such alterations usually develop later in the course of the illness and are a major cause of disability, especially because of the high risk for falls that derives.

Using the exam to pick up postural instability is of the utmost importance for the management of patients with PD, since it will trigger either a medication adjustment or a physical therapy intervention both aimed at falls prevention.

We have three tests for this part of the PD exam:

1)     Standing up from a chair

2)     Free walking

3)     Provoked “pull test” maneuver for balance

Standing From Chair

In this test we want to see if the patient is able to stand up from the sitting position without using the hands. To perform the test, first ask the patient to cross the arms on the chest and then to stand up. Make sure to keep one of your hands behind the patient’s back throughout the test, in order to prevent the patient to fall backwards and hit the head against the wall. In normal conditions the patients will be able to stand up without any difficulties.

Standing from chair (1): the patient crosses his arms on the chest.

Standing from chair (2): the patient stands up while the examiner keeps a hand on his back.

Free Walking

This part of the exam consists in observing the patient’s gait. To increase the chances of picking up any abnormalities that may be present, the patient should walk back and forth several times, ideally, in a hallway at least 10 feet long.

While the patient is walking, we need to look for:

-       Loss of balance on the turns

-       Reduced step length

-       Loss of heel strike

-       Loss of arm swings

These are typical abnormalities of gait in Parkinson’s disease. Also, in the initial stages of the disease, these anomalies tend to be unilateral, making them easier to recognize.

Click here to jump to the section on the video showing an example of asymmetric heel strike and arm swing loss.

A gait with short steps and absent heel strike bilaterally is called “festinating” or “shuffling” gait and is typical of Parkinson’s disease.

Click here to see an example of festinating gait in the video.

Observe for arm swinging, step length and heel strike.

"Pull Test" for Balance

In this test the examiner stands behind the patients and by pulling on their shoulder tries to make them fall backwards. If the patients are able to correct their center of gravity in just one or two steps, the test is negative for a balance abnormalities. The test is instead considered positive if the patients catch their balance in more than two steps or if they do not stabilize at all and tend to fall to the ground.

Click here to see an example of how the “Pull Test” should be performed.

To make sure the test is performed in a safe way, there are some precautions that should be taken:

-       First, there should be a wall behind the examiner, so that if the patients do not manage to correct their balance and fall backwards, the examiner can grab them and together they can fall on the wall;

-       Second, the examiner must teach the patients how to perform the test and must explain what is going to happen if they are going to lose balance and fall.

Click here to see an example of an abnormal result on the “Pull Test”.

Negative Pull Test.

Clinical Pearl

"When during a follow up visit we notice new worsening bradykinesia, tremor or rigidity, this does not necessary imply that a change in the medication regimen is needed, unless it is significantly impacting the quality of life of the patient. On the other hand, even the slightest impairment of gait and balance control necessitates an intervention, that may be as simple as physical therapy."

Key Learning Points

Learn the Parkinson's Disease exam aspects that include:

inspection

bradykinesia

rigidity

tremor

gait and balance abnormalities

Related to Parkinson's Disease Exam

Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples

Cerebellar Exam

Gait Abnormalities

Ankle Brachial Index

Ankle and Foot Exam

Aortic Regurgitation Exam

Ascites & Venous Patterns

Bedside Ultrasound

Breast Exam

Cardiac Second Sounds

Carpal Tunnel Exam

Cerebellar Exam

Common Mistakes in Point of Care Cardiac Ultrasound (Echocardiography, POCUS)

Deep Tendon Reflexes

Dermatology Exam: Acne vs. Rosacea

Dermatology Exam: Learning the Language

Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam

Dermatology Exam: Nevi (Mole) Exam

Diastolic Murmurs Exam

Fundoscopic Exam (Ophthalmoscopy)

Gait Abnormalities

Hand Exam

Hip Region Exam

Internal Capsule Stroke

Involuntary Movements and Tremor Diagnosis: Types, Causes, and Examples

Knee Exam

Liver Disease, Head to Foot

Liver Exam

Low Back Exam

Lung Ultrasound: A Comprehensive Guide

Lymph Node Exam

Mastering Newborn Exams

Modified Sarnat Exam for Neonatal Encephalopathy

Neck Vein Exam

Neonatal Neurologic Exam

Newborn Jaundice Assessment

Parkinson's Disease Exam

Pelvic Exam

Precordial Movements in the Cardiac Exam

Pulmonary Exam: Percussion & Inspection

Pulsus Paradoxus and Blood Pressure Measurement Techniques

Pupillary Responses

Rapid Assessment of a Newborn

Rectal Exam

Shoulder Exam Tutorial

Spleen Exam

Tarsal Tunnel Exam

The Stanford 25 Exams

Thyroid Exam

Tongue Exam

Understanding Scleroderma

Visit the 25

Learn more about Stanford 25.

The 25

Video Gallery

Annual Symposium

Blog

Recent Posts

Archive

Categories

Stanford School of Medicine

About

Contact

Maps & Directions

Careers

Basic Science Departments

Clinical Science Departments

Academic Programs

Vision

Find People

Visit Stanford

Search Clinical Trials

Give a Gift

©2025 Stanford University

Privacy Policy

Terms of Use

Accessibility

Non-Discrimination

Non-Discrimination

Stanford complies with all applicable civil rights laws and does not engage in illegal preferences or discrimination.

Stanford's Non-Discrimination Policy

Stanford University

Stanford School of Medicine

Stanford Children's Health